Their faces have changed. For nearly a year I have been photographing the Azov regiment, whose soldiers are among those currently fighting to hold the city of Bakhmut. The unit grew out of a volunteer militia that was established when Russia invaded eastern Ukraine in 2014, though it’s been reconstituted since then and brought under the control of the Ministry of Defence. When I first met the soldiers last April they were full of joyous patriotism. There were lots of young new recruits who had been inspired by the regiment’s heroic stand in Mariupol. Now, as the battle in Bakhmut drags on, they seem tired. They have seen people die, they have killed, they have lost brothers. I can see their hearts are heavier. But they have also become more skilled. There is a battalion fighting alongside Ukrainian forces called Sheikh Mansur, which is made up of volunteers from Chechnya. These fighters took me into the city with them. It’s under constant shelling and now almost totally destroyed, a ghost town except for a few thousand civilians. There is a never-ending, deep sound and you can feel the air vibrating: it’s like being inside a drum. The sky is loaded with metal and there’s a sense that something might fall and hit you any moment. One night when I was in the city with the Chechens we got an order to evacuate. The street lights don’t work any more and we had to drive on the dark roads without headlights: to be seen would mean getting shot. I spent some time in the trenches that surround the city. Drones are always flying overhead. It’s impossible to tell whether they’re Ukrainian or Russian. Each explosion brings the same doubt: was that friendly mortar fire or an enemy shell landing? It rained all day yesterday, so the trenches will probably be flooded now. The wet soaks everything, your clothes, your shoes. Carrying my camera, my bullet-proof vest and my backpack – much less than a soldier’s load – I sometimes found it almost impossible to move through the mud. But when you’re told to move you have to do it quickly. Between different positions there is little to protect you from the Russian snipers a few hundred metres away. Sprinting between them, with the mud and the rain, is like some kind of perverse CrossFit exercise. Troops are rotated every two days or so, moving between bases at different distances from the front. Away from the zero line (the point of contact with the Russians) there is a chance to relax a little. There are hardly any comforts available though. Recently I was with a group resting in an abandoned house, a few kilometres from the front. The neighbourhood had been bombed to obliteration, and the only source of warmth was the flame from the gas stove. Simple things become luxuries: a cup of tea, a shared cigarette. In these quiet moments I can sense optimism in the soldiers. Yes, there is a palpable fear of getting killed or wounded. But more than that, I perceive their sense of brotherhood. They have built bonds by living together through this war. They have a mission to do. They believe that for every Ukrainian killed they take five Russians. With every day they grow more effective on the ground. Their faces may be older, but they are also wiser. ■ As told to Arjun Dodhia Photographs by Emilien Urbano