To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. DEMOCRACY HAS had a rotten few years in Asia. Myanmar’s army forced out Aung San Suu Kyi, the country’s civilian leader, in a coup. A drug-running theocracy took control of Afghanistan. China and Hong Kong have become ever-more authoritarian. Freedoms across the region have been in retreat since 2015 and are close to their lowest-recorded level on the Democracy Index, a yearly ranking by EIU, our sister company. But signs of hope are emerging. Asia and Australasia, grouped together in the index, arrested a years-long democratic decline in 2022. And Thailand, run by a former general who seized power from an elected government in 2014, was the most improved democracy in the ranking. Why? EIU assesses countries in five categories of democratic health and then classifies governments on a ten-point scale, ranging from full democracy to autocracy. Asia and Australasia are home to seven “authoritarian regimes”, including Afghanistan, Myanmar and North Korea—the three lowest-ranked of the 167 countries and territories in the index. The region also contains five “full democracies”, seven “hybrid regimes”—places that maintain some freedoms but are often plagued by leaders who flout democratic norms—and nine “flawed democracies”, including Thailand. Thailand’s rise, from 72nd in the index in 2021 to 55th last year, was brought about partly by a healthier political opposition. Rivals to the ruling party earned important wins in local elections and by-elections in 2022. They also launched a petition against Prayuth Chan-ocha, Thailand’s prime minister, alleging he had outstayed the eight-year term permitted by the constitution. He was suspended from office for more than a month while a court heard the argument. Mr Prayuth has promised to hold a general election, probably in May; his political enemies could make big gains. Thailand was also one of the earliest Asian countries to relax its covid rules in 2022, boosting its score. Other Asian countries also climbed the rankings. Cambodia’s score rose by the second-highest percentage in Asia last year; it plans to hold elections in July which the ruling party is not guaranteed to make all the running. But such advances should be treated with caution: Hun Sen, the country’s ageing strongman, continues to crush political opposition. Observers should also be wary of Thailand’s progress. Its army still appoints a senate, which can help pick the prime minister and holds a veto over elected lawmakers. And it is far from certain that Thailand’s rulers will hold free and fair ballots in May (or accept the result if they lose). The vote count in 2019’s general election was bedevilled by irregularities. When a party critical of military rule proved popular, it was dissolved and its leader was charged under lèse-majesté laws, which ban criticism of the king. The government has used these laws to lock up hundreds of others in recent years. Those spying green roots of freedom in Asia should stay sceptical.■