Dance Your Way Home. By Emma Warren. Faber; 416 pages; £18.99 It is a spellbinding scene. “Lovers Rock”, Steve McQueen’s film about West Indian immigrants in London in 1980, is set mostly at a house party. A DJ puts on “Silly Games”, Janet Kay’s hit song, and the characters dance and sway for ten minutes, entirely lost in the music. The record finishes, but the partygoers keep the song going a cappella: no one wants the moment to end. It is a perfect expression of how dancing and music bring people together in a joyous shared experience. The scene is mentioned only fleetingly in “Dance Your Way Home”, a fascinating social history of dancing by Emma Warren, even though it encapsulates all the book’s major themes. Ms Warren believes that “dancing is a basic need which has somehow been hived off from everyday life”. Her focus is on Britain, but she cites academic evidence that the urge to move is universal. She shows that dancing is beneficial for an individual’s physical and mental well-being and an important medium through which people can express their culture and heritage. The author sketches out a case that “it is still considered broadly unbecoming for ‘persons of prominence’ to dance”, and quotes a British academic, Caspar Melville, who says that resisting dancing is “the burden of the powerful”. A refusal to dance sends a message that “I have mastered my body and my base nature,” Mr Melville suggests. This explains why the privileged can be awkward dancers, Ms Warren adds. She also says the association of dance culture and wantonness is why clubs are often in the cross-hairs of the authorities. The dance-lovers she writes about are almost always at risk of losing places to boogie. Some dancers are siloed due to prejudice: the party in Mr McQueen’s film takes place in a house because there are few spaces for such a gathering. “Dance Your Way Home” is full of interesting details about genres and styles that have emerged from the shadows. She notes the influence of a school, Mendel Catholic High, on the creation of Chicago house music. In the late 1970s the school was in penury until one student, Kirkland Townsend, persuaded the friars to let him host parties to raise funds. For more than a decade, Mr Townsend squeezed between 3,000 and 4,000 youngsters into the school gymnasium every Saturday night to move to the bold new sounds of the city’s DJs such as Ron Hardy and Frankie Knuckles. For those unfamiliar with their work, Ms Warren likens the scenario to “having Jean-Michel Basquiat drop into your after-school art club, or Serena Williams cover Friday-afternoon PE”. In the past 20 years, dance culture in Britain has had to contend with tighter regulation. In 2003 late-night venues were forced to apply for new licences, “giving councils and the police additional opportunities to object”. In 2005 the Metropolitan Police in London introduced Form 696, an infamous piece of risk assessment that required promoters to apply to hold events in most of the city’s boroughs, and to specify the personal details of all performers, the target audience and the style of music to be played. After years of complaint, it was withdrawn in 2017. All this takes a toll. Ms Warren identifies Plastic People, which ran between 1994 and 2015 in two London venues, as the closest thing to a perfect club: a “small, dark space where people could dance freely to high-quality sounds without being observed”. In 2010 the Met sought to review the club’s licence. It eventually backed down, but a big police presence outside the club became commonplace. Plastic People’s founder and promoter, Ade Fakile, closed the venue in 2015 and tells Ms Warren that “it just felt like time to stop.” Following the closure of her favourite haunt, Ms Warren scoured London in search of something innovative and exciting. She alighted on a jazz jam held in a Deptford restaurant and then, during lockdown, turned to the internet. Online, she found “people approximated communality: an acquaintance’s Zoom dance class culminated with everyone turning off their lights and dancing, as if together, in the dark.” It is an apt image. Even in the depths of adversity, dancing found a way. ■