SLEEK MINIMALISM may not be what visitors expect when crossing the threshold of an Indian museum. The country’s cash-strapped national exhibition spaces are treasure chests of art and artefacts spanning continents and centuries, yet the treasures tend to languish in rooms that resemble the dusty offices of the government bureaucrats who administer them. Full of dimly lit paintings and grimy cases adorned with yellowing notes, they are a far cry from the glittering temples of art commonly found in Western cultural capitals. MAP (short for Museum of Art and Photography), which opened last month in Bangalore, India’s startup capital, presents a different image. It sits opposite a cluster of ageing government-run museums in the city’s leafy centre; the cuboid building—with its sparkling, cross-patterned glass façade—looks like an oversized jewellery box. Inside it is all gleaming white walls, grey stone floors and understated furnishings. The building retreats to make space for the art on display. The museum’s collection is made up of 60,000 works that come chiefly from South Asia, but range across mediums and span a time period from the 10th century to today. Some 7,000 have been donated by the museum’s founder and chief financier, Abhishek Poddar, an Indian industrialist who has amassed one of the country’s largest private art collections. His family’s foundation bought the plot on which MAP now sits. The building was largely financed by donations from the city’s tech scions. The museum does not currently receive any government funding. When Mr Poddar first floated the idea of setting up MAP several years ago, he met with strong resistance from local artists, who objected to the source of his family’s wealth (explosives for mining) and the corporate vibe of the enterprise. Now that it is open, the museum feels like a response to those objections, with its emphasis on questioning hierarchies and fostering exchange with the communities of the city in which it sits. Kamini Sawhney, the director, is keen to stress MAP’s focus on inclusivity, and its rich programme of performances by young local artists and other interactive events. “We don’t want the museum to be the dominant voice,” she says. The question of who gets to speak and who is forced to be silent and observed is the theme of the opening exhibition, “Visible/Invisible”, which explores the representation of women in art. Set to be on display for the next three years, it was inspired by material Ms Sawhney read during the pandemic. She recalls articles on soaring domestic-violence rates, the shockingly low labour-force participation of Indian women, girls dropping out of school and India being one of the world’s most unsafe places for women. “This was very distressing to me, so I thought, ‘Why don’t we pick up this narrative and explore it?’” The result is a searing commentary on women’s place both in art and Indian society. The exhibition looks at the issue through four themes: “goddess and mortal”, “sexuality and desire”, “power and violence” and “struggle and resistance”. The themes make an old subject feel fresh thanks to the juxtapositions of artworks that are surprising and often darkly humorous. In the first room, a trio of traditional sculptures of goddesses commune with Bhupen Khakhar’s “Devi” (in Hinduism, Devi is the mother goddess), a violently sensual painting that assembles a feminine figure by combining red paint with a collage of female organs cut from an anatomy book. A later room combines traditional portrait photography with subversions of it: in images by a Sri Lankan artist and photographer, Anoli Perera, women strike demure poses with their hair over their faces whereas Gauri Gill, from India, asked Rajasthani girls to pose as they wanted to see themselves. On a lower floor is a collection of photos by Jyoti Bhatt. Better known as a painter, he took intimate portraits of his contemporaries in India’s post-independence art scene and documented folk and rural art that is frequently overlooked by more established artists and critics. “We are trying”, says Ms Sawhney, “to dispel existing narratives about the separateness of art forms, dispel the hierarchies imposed by tradition and by our colonisers and look at our own culture with fresh eyes.” ■