Are you a journalist?” a student asked me. I recognised their shaggy surfer hair from a photo in the student newspaper. Libby Harrity is the president of the student senate at New College of Florida, a public liberal-arts college at the centre of a political maelstrom. A meeting of the student government was about to begin and Harrity had heard there was a journalist in the room. (Harrity asked to be referred to with they/them pronouns in this article.) “I’m sorry but you can’t be here,” Harrity told me politely but firmly. Well, I replied, according to the student-government constitution, these meetings are open to the public. I held a print-out of the constitution, ready to show the relevant passage. Harrity turned and walked down the burgundy-carpeted steps back to the stage, where they began conferring with their fellow officials. Two women sitting across the aisle glared at me. I waited for a verdict. It’s not surprising that the students of New College have succumbed to a bunker mentality. Their school is under siege. Ron DeSantis, the ambitious Republican governor of Florida, is on a crusade to purge academia of left-wing orthodoxy, as he sees it. He has intervened in the affairs of several public universities in Florida but nowhere more forcefully than at New College, a small, progressive college, where many students identify as LGBTQ. The governor’s chief of staff said he wants to remake it into a “Hillsdale of the South”, a reference to a private, Christian college in Michigan steeped in the conservative movement. DeSantis called for the college, as he has done others in Florida, to abolish “diversity, equity and inclusion” (DEI) practices and replace them with “equality, merit and colour-blindness”; and to hire faculty with expertise in “free enterprise, civic virtue, family life, religious freedom and American principles”. To that end, DeSantis and his allies in the university system appointed in January seven new trustees to the 13-member board of New College, all of them ideologically conservative, including a Hillsdale professor. (It is legal, though without precedent, to alter the board of trustees so drastically in one go.) To DeSantis, New College is a laboratory in which he can test his theory that it is possible to change culture through force of will. The experiment officially began on January 31st, when the new board of trustees met for the first time. Several trustees had already broadcast their plans for the college. Christopher Rufo, a conservative firebrand, told the New York Times that the board would “design a new core curriculum from scratch”. He later tweeted that “we will be shutting down low-performing, ideologically captured academic departments and hiring new faculty”. In its first meeting, the board forced out the well-regarded college president. Richard Corcoran, a close ally of DeSantis in his quest to revolutionise education, was appointed as a temporary replacement. The board later abolished the Office of Outreach and Inclusive Excellence (three of the office’s four employees, however, will stay at the college in other roles, and continue to focus on diversity). Eddie Speir, one of DeSantis’s appointees to the board, wrote on Substack, “As I see it, we as trustees, are to lead New College of Florida out of wokeness.” Ever since, the college has been in uproar. Many students are attempting to resist, through measures big and small. Some protest or express their opposition in messages chalked on campus: “trans rights wrongs”, “DeSatan” or, simply, “Rufo fuck off”. Other students are just trying to get on with their studies. Those who are learning gender theory, or taking courses such as “Introduction to African Studies” and “Colonial Encounters”, can’t help but worry that their classes will be deemed too woke to last. Many feel that the campus is no longer their own. The new trustees and interim president roam the grounds, sometimes trailed by film crews. Reporters follow in their wake (“I want your insights”, read a message from one journalist, which he had chalked onto a footbridge, along with his phone number and email address). One of the new trustees was the subject of a death threat emailed to the college. An anonymous Twitter account claimed that local members of the Proud Boys and Oath Keepers, two far-right militias, would maintain order at the trustees’ meetings. Staff at the library have received training on how to respond to violent intruders. Students are suspicious of interlopers. Many told me they didn’t want to speak on the record because they were concerned for their safety. The student government decided, in the end, to put my presence to a vote. After I explained to the assembled why I was there, a majority elected to keep me there. I stuffed the constitution back into my bag. The student-government meeting was the first since the trustees had forced out the college president a week earlier. The conservative incursion was pretty much all anyone could talk about. (“Are we getting media training?” one student in front of me whispered to their neighbour.) Harrity ranged across the stage and, even though there were more than 50 people present, called on everyone by name. They tried to buck up the students by pointing out that the kind of sweeping change DeSantis had talked about would be hard to put into effect. “They cannot force us all to leave, they can’t change our demographics in one year. I think New College’s culture is here to stay no matter whether they like it or not,” Harrity said. Students snapped their fingers in appreciation. Yet when discussion turned to how exactly the students should respond, the goodwill dissipated. There are two main factions on campus. Harrity is among the leaders of a group who want to engage with the trustees in hopes of limiting the damage, as they see it. In the meeting it was suggested that Speir, who co-founded a Christian high school, would be receptive to student concerns. “He really cares about the kids [at his school] and I know once he comes here, and gets to know everyone, he will really care about all of you,” one student-government official said. That riled members of the other faction, who favour confrontation. “Have you thought about the fact that Speir is an open transphobe?” one student demanded. (She later pointed me to a tweet Speir had liked that warned that schools were indoctrinating kids with an “LGBTQ agenda”; more recently Speir also tweeted a psychiatrist’s contention that transgender people suffer from a “mental disorder”.) When I asked Speir what he thought about the student’s description of him, he replied, “Woke ideology makes for some very fuzzy logic.” The confrontational faction has organised protests: at one, Sam Sharf, a transgender woman with blue hair who clatters around campus on a skateboard, condemned the trustees as “fucking fascists”. At the student-government meeting, another member of this group said dialogue with the trustees was pointless, arguing that they “really don’t care” what so-called “woke” students think (you could hear the air quotes). The dispute distilled a familiar quandary in the culture wars: is talking in good faith to your adversary worthwhile or hopelessly naive? Compromise is not Harrity’s first instinct. Slim and fresh-faced, they look younger than their 19 years, but are battle-tested from years of verbal combat with “Reaganite white dudes” at high school. “I fought tooth and nail because you know, for them, it wasn’t really about identity. But for me, it was about declaring independence from hetero-patriarchal identity.” Harrity was impelled to enrol at New College by the sense that people could be whoever they wanted to be there. The college is situated on prime land overlooking glittering Sarasota bay and shaded by old banyan trees. In 1964 it became the first university in Florida to admit students of all races. A free-wheeling spirit infuses the teaching. Students design their own courses, such as biblical Hebrew and composting, and pursue independent-study projects like developing robotic prosthetics or fighting red tide, a kind of algal bloom. Harrity went to France for a month to improve their French and study the “cultural impacts of cheese” (“My professor was like ‘hell yeah’”). Instead of letter grades, faculty give “narrative evaluations”. This might sound unrigorous but New College came fifth in US News and World Report’s most recent annual ranking of public liberal-arts colleges in America. Campus culture is similarly unconventional. There is a club called Anarchy Deathsticks, for knitting enthusiasts. There are survivalist games pitting humans against humans pretending to be zombies. There are parties at a palm-tree-shaded court which the Florida legislature has recognised as the Centre of the Universe (the result of a prank played by students who smuggled this honorific into the college’s governing documents, according to student lore). That court is paved with bricks on which alumni have engraved messages such as “This is not a brick” and “This place is not for everyone”. This ethos makes New College attractive to many queer students. “Coming to New College and realising that trans is normal was overwhelming for me,” said Harrity. It is easy to see how New College ended up in DeSantis’s crosshairs. Progressive ideas on gender and race have become bogeymen of his war on wokeness. His “Don’t Say Gay” law, enacted last year, bans the discussion of gender ideology or sexual orientation with young primary-school students. The governor also signed a similar law last year forbidding the instruction of certain ideas about race, commonly tarred as “critical race theory”, in Florida schools. But DeSantis has encountered resistance in the courts to implementing the law at universities, where the First Amendment grants professors broader protection than that enjoyed by school teachers. Stymied by the courts, DeSantis has moved to transform the administration of Florida’s public universities, most radically at New College. His supporters argue that as New College is publicly funded, the state government has every right to set the direction of its pedagogy. The new trustees have talked about the importance of a “classical liberal arts” education but have not described specific courses they would like to see taught. It is unclear if they will call for religiously infused instruction like at Hillsdale. (At Speir’s suggestion, in-person meetings of the new trustees have started with a Christian prayer, in the spirit of Hillsdale.) If Harrity were just another student, they might be happy just to shout down the trustees along with other protesters. But as a leader in student government, they feel a responsibility to advocate for the broader interests of the student body. So rather than shunning the trustees, Harrity insisted on the necessity of talking. There were practical matters that needed addressing, such as crumbling dorms and unreasonably short cafeteria opening hours. “Finding ways to appeal to these strange, mean guys who have been put on our doorstep will make way more difference than anger and resistance outright will,” Harrity said. “I don’t think [Spier] is going to change his mind about gay people. But frankly that shouldn’t affect us necessarily. Because you can’t outright ban gay people or gay events. So if he doesn’t like gay people, that’s tough shit. But I want money for dorms.” The approach seems to be bearing some fruit: at a board meeting on February 28th, the interim president said that campus facilities were in need of “improvements” and declared his intention to tackle “food scarcity”. Harrity acknowledges, with a sheepish laugh, that their ambition plays a role in this pragmatic approach. They are mulling campaigning for student-government president later this year, and so have an interest in maintaining the influence of student officials with the trustees. Sharf, the activist who has become the face of the student resistance, said student government does have a role to play in talks with trustees, but she doubts that Harrity and their ilk can make much headway on substantive issues. “They may be too optimistic in their ability to compromise and make diplomatic deals with bad-faith actors,” she said. One word she used to describe their approach was “appeasement”. It may not matter what the students do. Universities are transient communities, and that is even truer of New College now. Harrity, who works part-time in the admissions office, says staff have received scores of complaints from parents of incoming students, with many of them cancelling their deposits. A number of students are making arrangements to transfer to other colleges. Alumni, whose donations supplement the funds the school gets from the taxpayer, are balking at the governor’s changes. But DeSantis has already directed an increased amount of public money to New College as part of his campaign, and can do so again. “The student body will be recomposed over time,” Rufo tweeted on February 28th. Some students will “self-select out”, he wrote, and “we’ll recruit new students who are mission-aligned”. If the students won’t accept that the college must change, the trustees will change the students. ■ Charlie McCann is a feature writer for 1843 magazine Illustrations Michael Glenwood