IN THE 1970s many households experienced the adverse impacts of unexpectedly high inflation following oil-price shocks. Thereafter, during the prolonged period of relatively low and stable inflation running up to 2022, the economic costs and the different effects on different demographic groups of high and volatile inflation tended to fade from memory. The inflation of 2022 has recalled those unhappy times. On average, British families will be worse off if there is a permanently higher cost of energy. The policy question is about who bears this pain. Most economic shocks affect groups of households differently. That was true of the financial crisis of 2007-09, of the covid-19 pandemic and of Brexit. It is well-nigh impossible for governments to offset these impacts fairly (assuming it is ever possible to reach agreement on what “fair” means). And although I expect central banks to succeed in bringing inflation under control, lessening the medium-term economic cost, that won’t undo the damage done to real incomes. For pensioners and prospective pensioners, fairness raises issues both within generations and across them. In recent decades pensioners have done well on average: a much smaller proportion of pensioner households in Britain is in relative poverty now than in the 1970s and 1980s. But averages conceal pockets of economic stress. Low-income pensioner households raise particular concern, as pensioners often find it hard to recover from an adverse impact on their income by seeking work or making major lifestyle changes. From April 2023 a single person on a full new state pension in Britain will receive £10,600 a year, about 83% of the latest minimum pensioner living standard (as estimated by the Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association, a trade body). However, this would be considered a scant minimum by many, and arguably the “triple lock’ (state pensions rising by the highest of inflation, earnings or 2.5%) has not yet achieved its long-term aim of providing a baseline adequate income. Volatility in asset prices in 2022 has drawn attention to the risks faced by individuals reliant on defined-contribution (DC) pensions, which work, in effect, as segregated savings accounts for each person signed up. Those planning to retire and take a large lump sum will find the value reduced by recent market movements, but risk-free returns (generally from government bonds) have increased to support those looking to draw down over time. Having a DC pot, the only option now for many, leaves individuals bearing significant risk and needing financial acumen to manage their retirement well. Defined-benefit (DB) pensioners, who receive a specified income, will also have met with a range of fortunes. The statutory minimum inflation increase for pensions in payment is just 2.5% for benefits accrued since April 2005. Many schemes are more generous than that—but only around 9% are fully protected against inflation. High inflation will have left the remainder worse off in real terms to a greater or lesser extent. The DB and (especially) DC pensions at present on offer both create arbitrary winners and losers at times of economic disruption. In seeking alternatives, more effective risk-sharing across and within generations is desirable. If the state pension and associated benefits now go a long way towards guaranteeing a basic income, is it reasonable to consider that those with additional pension provision might be expected to share somewhat in fluctuations of economic fortune? It is widely argued that the regulatory tightening of DB-valuation rules has made their promises deliverable only at an unacceptably high cost to the firms and organisations that have offered them. Yet transferring all the risk to individuals by switching wholly to DC is also unsatisfactory. The Universities Superannuation Scheme, one of the few private-sector DB schemes still open to new members, is keen to find a better way forward. We have been asked to explore conditional indexation as used today by some Canadian pension schemes. In such schemes, members’ benefits are increased in line with inflation, but only so long as the scheme remains sufficiently well-funded. In other words, if increasing the promised pensions fully in line with inflation, and so the scheme’s future liabilities, was considered to weaken funding too far, a smaller increase could be granted. Equally, if the scheme’s position subsequently improved more than expected, the full inflation protection could be restored. That could even include making good increases that had not been fully paid in the past. The benefit of this, in adverse circumstances, is that the higher cost of providing pensions is not borne only by employers and (often implicitly) by younger members of the scheme through higher pension contributions, but shared with current pensioners. While incorporating a modest element of risk-sharing, it permits higher-risk investment strategies, and so in most (but not all) scenarios these schemes are able to offer better value to pensioners than can existing open DB schemes in Britain. The attraction for prospective pensioners is obvious. But this type of scheme should also appeal to those in younger generations. If economic circumstances, and so prospective returns, deteriorate, pensioners share (to a limited extent) in the pain borne by younger generations–while remaining protected by the underpinning of the state pension. Equally, improvements in prospects could be shared across generations. Today pensioners with less than full indexation are actually sharing in the pain of our economic woes. But economic pain is not always linked to high inflation. Partial indexation as a “safety valve” for pension schemes does not work if deteriorating prospects are linked with a period of low inflation, as occurred in Britain in the 2010s. A move to conditional indexation would enable a more rounded view of the health of a DB scheme and of how to distribute better and worse fortunes. Introducing conditional indexation will require some modest regulatory change, for example through some additional flexibilities in the auto-enrolment regulations for DB and hybrid pension schemes. Speedy action on this should support the survival of Britain’s remaining open DB schemes. More optimistically, employers with the means might be willing to offer these more flexible DB schemes, now that some risk can be shared with their employees. Without such action we are forcing an unnecessary choice between very expensive or highly uncertain outcomes for future pensioners.■ Dame Kate Barker is the chair of the Universities Superannuation Scheme, a British pension scheme. She was a member of the Bank of England’s monetary-policy committee from 2001 to 2010, and chief economic adviser at the Confederation of British Industry, a business body, between 1994 and 2001.