IT WAS striking enough to see two longtime foes sit down together. On March 10th the national-security advisers of Iran and Saudi Arabia agreed to restore diplomatic relations after a seven-year rupture. What made the moment still more remarkable was the venue: not a regional capital, but Beijing. Sitting between the two men was Wang Yi, the top diplomat of China, a country that had heretofore played no significant role in the Middle East’s messy diplomacy. The agreement gives the countries two months to reopen their respective embassies and re-establish ties. As ever in the Middle East, words are not actions: events could derail the rapprochement. Even if they follow through, this is a transactional agreement, not a transformational one. Iran and Saudi Arabia will remain at daggers drawn. China’s role is more interesting. A country that long took a mercantilist view of the Middle East now appears to be comfortable wading into its politics. But this, too, can be overstated. The deal is a sign that both Saudi Arabia and Iran want to appease China, not that it is the region’s new superpower. The diplomatic crisis dates to 2016, when Saudi Arabia cut ties with Iran after mobs ransacked the Saudi embassy in Tehran and its consulate in Mashhad. The attacks followed the Saudi execution of Nimr al-Nimr, a dissident Shia cleric. Things only got worse from there. In 2019 Iranian-made drones struck oil facilities in Saudi Arabia, briefly disabling 6% of the world’s oil output. The two countries have spent years talking about reconciliation—lately with renewed urgency. Saudi Arabia’s priority is to extract itself from its war in Yemen, launched in 2015 after the Houthis, a Shia rebel group, seized much of the country. Eight years and hundreds of thousands of deaths later, they still control much of Yemen. If the war has accomplished one thing, it has been to push the Houthis closer to Iran. The mullahs now supply the Houthis with weapons, money and training. The Saudis are eager to strike a deal with the Houthis that would leave the group in power in exchange for their agreement to end cross-border missile and drone attacks. For months they have wanted Iran to push the Houthis to accept. So the Saudi-Iranian deal may presage a separate agreement in Yemen. That will not end the conflict, which was a civil war before the Saudi-led coalition intervened. But it would offer the kingdom a face-saving exit. The agreement could also have implications for Iran International, a satellite television channel established in London in 2017 that airs relentless criticism of the Iranian regime. The channel’s bosses deny any direct links to the Saudi government. Nonetheless, the Iranian government has demanded that Saudi Arabia rein in the channel. Those calls grew more intense when protests swept Iran in September. The Iranian regime also started threatening journalists working for Iran International, which forced British police to offer them round-the-clock protection. Last month the channel announced that it would move its broadcasts to Washington. None of this heralds an era of friendship between Saudi Arabia and Iran. Their ideological disputes date back to Iran’s Islamic revolution in 1979. The Saudis will still worry about Iran’s nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes, and its network of proxies in Arab states. Iran, for its part, will continue to see a Saudi hand in its (self-inflicted) domestic unrest. Still, the deal may lower the chances of a cold war turning hot. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) has reached a similar conclusion. Last year it restored full relations with Iran, having downgraded them after the attack on Saudi missions in 2016. The UAE was unnerved by drone attacks last year on Abu Dhabi, its capital, and worries that it could face retaliation for a possible Israeli strike on Iran’s nuclear facilities. In Washington, all these points may be secondary. The focus will be on the country that brokered the agreement, not the countries involved. “Seeing the Chinese role here will not warm any hearts in Washington,” tweeted Michael Singh of the Washington Institute for Near East Peace Policy, a think-tank. It will also be a boon to Republicans who want to argue that President Joe Biden’s Middle East policy is failing. This is an undeniable shift in China’s role. In 2021 Mr Wang proposed a “five-point plan” for Middle East peace, full of banal slogans like “advocating mutual respect” and “upholding equality and justice”. These empty words were the extent of Chinese diplomacy in the region. Now China has taken a far more public role. Still, caveats are in order. Much of the diplomacy took place not in China but in Iraq and Oman, with America’s encouragement. China merely helped nudge the deal over the finish line. And it is hard to see how China can repeat the trick. It has gingerly dipped a toe into the swamp of Israeli-Palestinian peace, but no one expects it to wade in much further. Both Iran and Saudi Arabia have good reason to play up Chinese involvement. In 2021 the Iranians signed a 25-year “strategic partnership” with China. Ebrahim Raisi, the hardline president, wants his countrymen to think economic ties with the Middle Kingdom are a substitute for relations with the West. As for the Saudis, they hosted Xi Jinping at a high-profile summit in December. China is their largest trading partner and the world’s biggest buyer of oil. After two years of frosty relations with Mr Biden, it does not hurt to remind the Americans that the kingdom has other powerful friends. Everyone stands to benefit—at least a bit. Saudi Arabia can ease tensions with a ruthless neighbour. Iran’s arch-conservative regime can look open to diplomacy. China can claim a diplomatic victory. But the underlying issues have not changed: this agreement is more about perception than reality. ■