IF GEORGIA’S GOVERNMENT wants to be part of the European Union, it has a strange way of showing it. Over the past few days the country’s ruling party, Georgian Dream, has started to push a law through parliament that would brand media and NGOs that receive funding from abroad as “foreign agents”. The move has drawn comparisons to similar laws in Hungary and Russia, and prompted huge demonstrations in the capital, Tbilisi. Georgia’s American and European partners have objected, publicly and privately. That this is happening at such a critical juncture for Georgia makes the legislation all the more inexplicable. The country is trying to implement reforms that the EU has demanded as conditions of it becoming a formal candidate for membership. Georgia has until the autumn to comply. The foreign-agent law would be a backward step on two reforms Brussels demands: freedom of the media, and of civil society. Indeed, the move almost looks like a deliberate act of self-sabotage. The law was rushed through its first reading on the evening of March 7th, two days before the debate was supposed to take place, and with little advance notice. Thousands of protesters headed to the parliament building, chanting “Georgia!” and shouting “Russians!” at the MPs inside. The police responded with tear-gas and water cannons; a video of a woman being drenched as she defiantly waved the EU flag instantly went viral. The foreign-agent law is the most ominous step yet in a series of political dramas that have raised doubts about Georgian leaders’ intentions towards the EU. The murky group of MPs, breakaway former members of Georgian Dream, who introduced the law have been voicing a steady stream of conspiracy theories, including an allegation that the West is trying to drag Georgia into the war in Ukraine. Bidzina Ivanishvili, the billionaire founder of Georgian Dream and the country’s behind-the-scenes ruler, has insinuated that Western governments are behind troubles he is having with his Swiss bank. Georgia’s opposition regularly accuses Georgian Dream of being in cahoots with Russia. Western diplomats are convinced that the party remains committed to a pro-West orientation. But they also believe that the isolated Mr Ivanishvili, having drawn paranoid conclusions from his banking troubles, is behind the recent anti-Western turn. “Are there people who believe they would be better off, that they could achieve their personal goals, if [Georgia] were not in the EU? Yes,” said one Western diplomat. Is Mr Ivanishvili one of those people? “I don’t know, he’s a complicated character. But he definitely has advisers who are”. It may not matter. Rejecting Georgia’s EU bid would further strengthen anti-European forces in the country, and so the club’s leaders may have little choice but to approve it. “In Ivanishvili’s mind—and maybe he’s not wrong—Georgia is too important geopolitically for the US and EU to give up, so he has room to manoeuvre,” says Salome Samadashvili, a former Georgian ambassador to the EU who is now an opposition MP. Yet the foreign-agent law is still a gamble. Maka Botchorishvili, the chair of the parliament’s EU Integration Committee and a ruling-party interlocutor with Brussels, struggles to defend the bill. “It’s a huge discomfort to be called a traitor,” she says. “You work day and night to push this country towards European integration, and then it’s challenged.” She adds that the party will wait for input from the Venice Commission, which advises the Council of Europe, a human-rights body. A final version of the foreign-agent bill may not be passed for months. If the past week is anything to go by, the process will be far from smooth. ■