To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. LAST YEAR it looked as if crypto were nearly finished. FTX, a huge crypto exchange, collapsed in November. Watchdogs bemoaned a lack of regulation; hackers were delving ever deeper into the supposedly safe DeFi universe. None of that has changed in 2023. On March 8th Silvergate Capital, a bank that works with crypto firms, such as FTX, went into liquidation. Depositors withdrew $8bn in January, forcing it to fire-sell its assets. And yet the reaction to Silvergate’s collapse among crypto traders was muted. The price of bitcoin, the world’s largest digital asset, barely moved after the news. Indeed, so far it has been a banner year for crypto. Bitcoin is up by 30% since January 1st; other big cryptocurrencies have also soared (see chart). What explains this unlikely rebound? It has several causes. Cryptocurrencies might be the Wild West of asset-trading, but they do follow some basic market principles. In late 2021 investors expected a gentle rise in American interest rates, to just 1%. But as inflation spiked, so did borrowing costs: the Fed’s policy rate is now in the 4.50-4.75% range. This led to a sharp sell-off in assets, from bitcoin to bonds. But by the start of 2023, with higher rates mostly factored in and the American economy proving resilient, investors rediscovered their appetite for risk. Other factors specifically helped crypto assets. Catastrophes like the collapse of FTX caused prices to tumble in 2022. But they may have beneficial consequences for crypto in the longer term. The likelihood that regulation will become more cautious could make digital assets less susceptible to the volatility that has engulfed the industry, and therefore more attractive to investors that crave predictability. Some crypto-heads argue long-term cycles in bitcoin prices should give tokens a lift this year. They have observed that prices for bitcoin seem to move in a four-year cycle, from the bottom of one bear market to the next. The last began in late 2018 and appears to have ended late last year. This theory would predict a recovery in prices this year. Such investment superstitions do not rely on any fundamentals. But, if enough cryptophiles hold them to be true, and act accordingly, then these types of cycles can have an impact. Still, a lot of uncertainty remains. Inflation remains stubbornly high, and any anticipation of an imminent end to monetary tightening in America has started to look naive. On March 7th Jerome Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, hinted that further rate increases might be necessary, triggering a tumble in markets. And the prices of major digital assets have recently begun to slide again, as investors anticipated the collapse of Silvergate. A year-on-year comparison paints a bleaker picture: bitcoin, for example, is down by 49% and ether by 44%. Crypto may have started the year on a strong foot—but given how volatile crypto can be there is no guarantee that optimism will last.■