THE AUSTRALIAN OPEN, the first grand-slam tennis tournament of the year, begins on January 16th with the sport on the brink of a new era. Two of the best players of all time, Roger Federer and Serena Williams, retired (or, in Ms Williams’s case, “evolved away” from the sport) in 2022. Rafael Nadal, another great and the defending champion, is trying to regain form after the latest in his long series of injuries. At 36, he cannot have many seasons left. The veterans aren’t finished yet. In the men’s singles, the favourite will be Novak Djokovic. The Serb has 21 grand-slam titles and will be desperate to equal Mr Nadal’s record of 22. He may be all the keener after missing last year’s tournament, having been deported from Australia over his refusal to be vaccinated against covid-19. He has just won a warm-up event in Adelaide. Nevertheless, at 35 Mr Djokovic is also nearing the end of his career, and in the past few days has been troubled by a hamstring injury. A new generation of challengers is emerging. The winner of the last grand slam of 2022, the US Open, was Carlos Alcaraz, a 19-year-old Spaniard who is already ranked number one in the world. Alas, he has withdrawn through injury. His defeated opponent in the final in New York was Casper Ruud, a 24-year-old Norwegian. Mr Ruud may become Mr Nadal’s successor as the world’s best player on clay courts—so watch out for him at the French Open in May and June, as well as in Melbourne. Stefanos Tsitsipas of Greece has already reached the semi-finals in Melbourne three times and was the losing French Open finalist in 2021. And Taylor Fritz, a 25-year-old American with a big first serve, looks like a future Wimbledon champion; he took Mr Nadal to a fifth-set tiebreak on the south-west London grass last summer. Great though the triumvirate of Mr Federer, Mr Nadal and Mr Djokovic has been, the men’s game will at least be a lot less predictable once their dominance comes to an end. Along with the young stars already mentioned, more seasoned campaigners such as Dominic Thiem and Daniil Medvedev are already grand-slam winners. By contrast, the women’s game has been wide open for several seasons. Ms Williams won her last grand slam (in Australia) in 2017. Since then 14 different women have won titles. The starkest example of how open competition has become was perhaps the 2021 US Open final, which featured two teenagers, Emma Raducanu and Leylah Fernandez—who since then have managed just one grand-slam quarter-final between them. Two players might have emerged as the new elite of women’s tennis: Naomi Osaka of Japan and Ash Barty of Australia. But Ms Osaka has struggled with injuries and mental health and will not appear in Melbourne, and Ms Barty retired last year at the age of only 25. However, a longer-lasting contender may have emerged: Iga Swiatek of Poland. At just 21, Ms Swiatek has the potential to be at the top of the women’s game for an extended period. She already has three grand-slam titles; in 2022 she became the first female player to win two in a season since Angelique Kerber in 2016. She has been ranked number one in the world since last April. The emergence of a star in women’s tennis who racks up lots of slams is probably overdue. In the 1960s and 1970s the sport was dominated in turn by Margaret Court, Billie-Jean King and Chris Evert; in the 1980s by Martina Navratilova; and in the 1990s by Steffi Graf, before the emergence of Ms Williams and her sister Venus in the 2000s. Ms Swiatek has an aggressive playing style and a strong serve and could easily become the next great champion. What will probably determine her longevity is her ability to avoid injury. The playing standard on the women’s tour is a lot higher than it was in the 1970s and 1980s, so that there are fewer easy games and matches are physically more demanding. The relentless routine of practice, travel and matchplay can wear down a competitor both physically and mentally. Ms Swiatek may be on the path to greatness. But much hard work lies ahead. ■