Natalia Kyrkach-Antonenko found out within two hours of it happening. An artillery strike. Shrapnel to the head. Death in seconds. Volunteers identified her husband Vitaly by his devilish looks and long hair; his nom de guerre “Beautiful” was no accident. One telephone call later, and Ms Kyrkach-Antonenko’s dreams of a family together were gone. But she had prepared for the eventuality. Now she intends to raise a family alone using sperm the couple froze on one of Vitaly’s two rotations back home. In an emotional appeal on social media, written a month after her husband’s death, she urged other couples to take out the same insurance policy. “It could be your only chance. Think and don’t put it off, I beg you.” Russian tanks brought Ukraine’s booming fertility industry to a shuddering stop in February. The clinics reopened in April to a changed world. Previously the customers were typically foreigners, taking advantage of Ukraine’s liberal rules on surrogacy. Now they are often Ukrainian couples, anxious because the husband has to go and fight. Mother and Child, the country’s largest fertility clinic, launched a programme to meet the new demand, encouraging servicemen and women to freeze their sperm or eggs free of charge, lest they be injured or killed on the front. Their partners were offered large discounts on assisted-conception programmes that usually cost between $1,300 and $4,000. The most needy were given the treatment free. Doctors called the initiative “Hero Nation”, a nod to the growing number of babies conceived to dead or seriously injured parents. They credit the programme with helping the clinic return to roughly 80% of its pre-war capacity. Vitaly Radko, a 37-year-old doctor at the main branch in Kyiv, says he wasn’t sure his staff would keep their jobs when they reopened in the spring. But as mobilisation took hold, he saw the numbers of patients increase. Now, 30 to 40 military couples walk through his doors every month, avoiding as they enter the bundles of wires linking diesel generators to cryo-chambers that store eggs, sperm and embryos. His office is covered with hundreds of photographs of the children he has helped bring into the world. Before the war, almost half of the doctor’s patients were foreigners; mainly from China, but also from America, Britain, France, Italy and Spain. Now there are only Ukrainians. Forty percent are military personnel. The men tend not to say much when they arrive, Dr Radko says. The women do the talking. But everyone understands the subtext. “The doctor and the couple all know the man could be injured, or killed while fighting on the front. You don’t need to vocalise that. You can tell by their mood and the serious looks on their faces that they know.” The doctor says war has changed his own attitude to the job; he has never felt as needed. It is up to people like him to limit the catastrophic effect the Russian invasion has already had on Ukrainian birth rates. “When there is war in your country and you aren’t at the front, you have to do what you do best, and we are best able to give life to new Ukrainians.” The practicalities can be complicated since soldiers often arrive in states of injury and stress. Navigating Ukrainian bureaucracy can be tricky too. Local law offers no legal basis on which to use a donor’s genetic material after he or she has died. Clinics therefore need patients to obtain private powers of attorney that specifically mention the right to post-mortem reproduction. Tanya and her partner, Eduard Konovka, who serves in the Ukrainian navy, have already obtained the papers, just in case. They are two of Dr Radko’s newest patients, having begun IVF treatment in late December after trying for a baby for 12 years; they travelled specially from the Black Sea coast to take advantage of the clinic’s free programme. They say the last hope of having children is something that has kept them going during difficult times. “Russia cannot take away the most important things from us: our time, the strength of character, and our dreams.” Inna Tikhonova, a psychologist advising several military couples, warns of possible dangers. “Having a child from a dead father is not a plaster to cover a wound…and can exacerbate the trauma,” she says. “Some schools would suggest avoiding any decision of consequence in the first year of following loss.” But Ms Kyrkach-Antonenko, who now has up to 20 years to use her late husband’s sperm, says that besides the diaries that he would send her from the trenches, the chance to bear a child is the only thing she has left of him. “Vitaly might not be alive, but his ability to become a father is. For as long as I am living, I intend to have as many of his babies as I can.” ■