IN 1952 PRESIDENT-ELECT DWIGHT EISENHOWER set out what he saw as a cornerstone of American democracy: “Our form of government has no sense unless it is founded in a deeply felt religious faith—and I don’t care what it is.” His words still loom over American politics. Almost 88% of members of the 118th Congress, which convened on January 3rd—but whose House members have not yet elected a speaker—are Christian. That share has barely shifted since the late 1970s (see chart). Only two members—less than half of 1%—say they are not religious. But the American public has changed. Just 64% of Americans say they are Christian compared with 90% in 1972. About 29% are religiously unaffiliated, up from 5%. Why are American lawmakers more pious than the population? Start with age. The average member of the House of Representatives is 57; the average senator is almost 64. The median age in America is 39. Older generations tend to be more religious than the young. In America, 83% of those over 65 are religious compared with 61% of those aged between 18 and 29. Second, religious people may be particularly likely to run for office. Religious groups offer useful networks for politicians hoping to connect with voters. White evangelicals, a formidable force in the Republican base, are the most striking example. Democrats have traditionally benefitted from the votes of black Protestants, Jews and other religious minorities. Third, many American voters remain wary of atheists, despite their own waning religiosity. In May a poll by the University of Maryland asked respondents how likely they would be to vote for a presidential hopeful who otherwise shared their views, depending on the candidate’s faith. Only 48% said they would vote for an atheist, a lower number than for any religion. Part of that suspicion dates to the cold war, when America faced an explicitly atheist enemy in the Soviet Union. It was then that America changed its motto to “In God we trust”, added a reference to the divine on dollar bills and inserted the Almighty into the pledge of allegiance. “To this day it’s almost a death sentence [for a politician to be atheist],” says Phil Zuckerman, of Pitzer College in California. At almost one-third of the population, the non-religious should be a powerful force in American politics. Avowed atheists and agnostics are highly politically active: they donate more frequently, put up more signs and attend more political meetings and protests than even white evangelicals. But they make up just a quarter of the religiously unaffiliated. The rest are “nones”: those who, when asked their faith, in effect shrug. They are often disengaged from civic issues in general, and are less likely than the average American to vote. Until they do, Congress will continue to reflect Eisenhower’s vision. ■