INFLATION APPEARS to have peaked across much of the rich world. But for some supermarket necessities—such as sugar, flour and butter—prices are still soaring to record highs (see chart). In France bakers have taken to the streets to protest about the rising price of boulangerie staples. In Britain supermarket bosses are accusing food producers of profiteering from price rises on various household essentials. Nowhere have prices risen more in recent months than in the sugar aisle. French shoppers are paying 23% more for the sweet stuff than they were a year ago. Italians and Spaniards are shelling out an extra 51%. In Germany the price has gone up by 63%. European confectioners are considering production cuts. Why is sugar so pricey? A poor European harvest is partly to blame. The area of land devoted to growing sugar beets is down by 4% this year, according to Südzucker, the continent’s biggest sugar producer. A hot and very dry summer has not helped. The European Commission expects the EU’s sugar output to fall to 15.5m tonnes in the 2022-23 season, down by 6.9% from the previous year. Imports are falling short, too. Last year Brazil, the world’s biggest sugar exporter, cut its forecast for this season’s crop by 16%, citing unfavourable weather. India, the second-biggest exporter, has slashed its quota for sugar exports by nearly half. But the main culprit is soaring natural-gas prices. Making sugar from sugar beets—which involves slicing the roots into strips and heating them in water at a temperature of 70-75°C—is energy-intensive. Most European sugar factories are powered by natural gas. But after Russia cut gas supplies to Europe over the summer, many producers converted their plants to other fuels. Nordzucker, a German producer, switched more than 80% of its domestic production capacity to oil. European producers also started to process crops earlier than usual to avoid energy shortages. But it has been impossible to avoid higher energy costs altogether. In many countries the price increase was quick and painful. Most contracts in the sugar industry are renewed annually. So many producers started passing on rising costs to customers only in October, at the start of the new season. This is why, for example, sugar prices in Germany increased by just 1.7%, year on year, in September, before shooting up by 42% the following month. Europe’s sugar high looks set to last. Energy prices, though down from their peaks, remain high. Input costs for growers, such as fuel and fertiliser, are also steep by historical standards. Producers, meanwhile, are betting that European consumers can stomach even higher supermarket bills. In November Niels Pörksen, the boss of Südzucker, told Reuters that the firm expects to raise its sugar prices again this year. The new year often brings resolutions for healthy eating habits; 2023 might be the year to stick to them. ■