IT IS NOT a good season for Europe’s skiers. Those hoping to enjoy winter sports after Christmas were left high and snowless—and what little snow there was had melted. After a mild autumn, a record-breaking heatwave moved into much of Europe towards the end of December. It came at the end of what has been the hottest year on record in Britain, France, Ireland and Spain, according to national weather services. The continent experienced its second-hottest year since records began in 1950, according to Copernicus, the EU’s Earth-observation programme. As 2023 began, temperatures in Europe were more freakish still. On January 1st eight countries recorded their warmest-ever January day—by huge margins. In Switzerland the average maximum temperature from December 14th to January 10th was 1.6°C higher than the average of the same 28-day period between 2012 and 2021 (see chart). In Bulgaria, the average maximum temperature since December 14th was 9.4°C, compared with an average of 4.6°C for the previous 11 years. On New Year’s Day Poland exceeded its highest previous temperature before sunrise. Warsaw, the capital, ultimately hit 18.9°C, a full 5°C above the previous record. In Bilbao, Spain, temperatures of 25°C outstripped average temperatures for January by 10°C. Several meteorologists described the heatwave as one of the most extreme weather events in European history. Climate change is almost certainly to blame, although its impact on this heatwave has not yet been assessed by scientists. Unusually high sea-surface temperatures and La Niña, a weather pattern that typically brings warmer winter winds to Europe, may have contributed to the heatwave. Both of these may be influenced by climate change, too—but it is not yet clear how. What is certain, however, is that rising global temperatures—caused by humans pumping greenhouse gases into the atmosphere—are making heatwaves more frequent, and more intense. Because the world is now, on average, about 1.3°C warmer than before the industrial revolution, temperatures can spike to levels that would previously have been unimaginable. In Europe temperatures are rising twice as fast as the global average. This year, European leaders may have welcomed that. The heatwave has helped lessen the impact in Europe of the energy crisis. Less demand for heating has meant that Europe has only had to pump half as much gas out of storage than in the previous two winters. In a period in which energy is scarce and prices are exceptionally high, warm weather may help Europe keep the lights on for now. In the long run it will cause more harm than good. ■