IF THE GOVERNMENT of Brazil’s new president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, thought that his inauguration on January 1st would put an end to protests by supporters of Jair Bolsonaro, the man he replaced, the events of January 8th showed that to be wishful thinking. At around 3pm in Brasília, the capital, thousands of bolsonaristas stormed the modernist buildings of Congress and the Supreme Court, along with the presidential palace, breaking windows and damaging furniture. Many of the insurrectionists had been camped out in front of federal army headquarters since October, when Mr Bolsonaro lost a tight election to Lula, as the leftist current president is known. Led by Mr Bolsonaro, a right-wing populist, to believe that the election was stolen, they begged the army to stage a coup. On Sunday, perhaps realising that no coup was coming, the bolsonaristas decided to take matters into their own hands. Although the rampage occurred during a congressional recess, meaning the invaded buildings were mostly empty, it bore striking similarities to the storming of the United States Capitol on January 6th 2021 by followers of Donald Trump. In the Senate, the bolsonaristas climbed onto the stage and slid down it as if it were a playground slide. In the Supreme Court, they ripped a justice’s door from its hinges and posted photos of themselves on social media hoisting it in the air as if it were a trophy. But if the riots in Washington revealed lapses in police intelligence and co-ordination, their Brazilian counterpart suggested something more worrying. While there is no evidence that the police were complicit in the insurrection, they were, at the very least, passive. Shortly after the invasion of Congress began in Brasília, a group of officers were caught on film chatting with protesters, taking selfies and filming the chaos rather than acting to stop it. Requests for back-up from the head of the Senate police to the governor of the federal district of Brasília, who is an ally of Mr Bolsonaro, were ignored until late in the afternoon. (In an apparent attempt to save face later, the governor fired his security secretary, who was Mr Bolsonaro’s justice minister.) Ever since January 6th 2021, when many of Mr Bolsonaro’s supporters cheered on the insurrectionists in Washington, a loud chorus of Brazilian security experts, politicians and diplomats has warned of the possibility that radical bolsonaristas could attempt something similar in Brazil. “The whole world knew this could happen,” says Renato Sérgio de Lima of the Brazilian Forum on Public Security, an NGO. On the day of Lula’s inauguration, The Economist visited the bolsonarista camp outside army headquarters and watched one of its leaders exchange text messages in an ominously named, recently created WhatsApp group called “Estrategia 2”, or “Strategy 2”. In recent days, bolsonaristas on social media have been calling for demonstrations in the capital. Mr Lima thinks it unlikely that police were unaware of plans to invade government buildings. Shortly before 6pm Lula declared a federal security intervention in the district of Brasília, putting the police under the command of an official he had appointed. He called the protesters “fascists” and “vandals” and blamed Mr Bolsonaro for “inciting” the invasion. The ex-president has yet to concede defeat in October’s election. To avoid passing the presidential sash to his successor, he spent inauguration day in Florida. From there, he condemned his supporters’ violent methods, if not their goals. By the end of the evening, police had managed to retake control of all three government buildings, using tear-gas and pepper spray to expel protesters. According to Lula’s justice minister, more than 400 people were arrested and some 40 buses used to transport them were seized. Lula vowed to prosecute the protesters and anyone involved in planning and financing the invasion. A trickier challenge will be understanding the police failures behind the riots and preventing future attempts by bolsonaristas to create chaos. The federal intervention gives Lula’s government broad powers to investigate and fire any officers shown to have violated their duties because of their political beliefs; this could kickstart similar reform efforts in other Brazilian states. That may take the attention away from other pressing matters, such as a series of sorely needed economic reforms. After years of political and economic tumult, Brazilians are desperate for stability. They will have to wait a little longer. ■