BINYAMIN NETANYAHU’S latest government has barely been in power a week but it has lost no time getting to work. Much attention has been paid to the far-right and ultrareligious parties in his coalition, which have received control of important ministries including national security, home affairs and finance. But it is the appointment of Yariv Levin, a member of Mr Netanyahu’s Likud party and one of his closest advisers, as justice minister, that may turn out to have the most profound effect on Israeli democracy. Mr Levin is determined to curb the powers of the country’s robustly independent Supreme Court. The new minister, a lawyer and veteran critic of the institution, wants to introduce an “override clause” which would allow a simple majority in the Knesset, Israel’s parliament, to pass legislation deemed unconstitutional by the court. Under his proposals the court would no longer be able to nullify government decisions on the ground of “reasonableness”. Politicians would appoint judges, and the government’s legal advisers, currently an independent group, would be replaced with political appointees. Tensions between elected governments and independent judiciaries are not unique to Israel. But Israel’s lack of a formal constitution and its unicameral proportional-representation election system, which usually leads to coalitions with a number of small but politically powerful special-interest parties, mean its Supreme Court has been highly interventionist. Israeli politicians of all stripes have bridled at the court’s reach. Israel’s founding prime minister, David Ben-Gurion of the centre-left Labour party, skipped the Supreme Court’s opening. Another Labour prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin, agreed to an override clause on a specific law in 1994 to appease religious members of his coalition. The new Netanyahu government is made up largely of politicians who object, on principle, to the interventions of unelected judges. They are adamant that they are upholding true democracy. Israel’s judges disagree. On January 12th Esther Hayut, the president of the Supreme Court, took the rare step of publicly criticising government policy, calling Mr Levin’s plan “a mortal wound to the independence of the judiciary”. Were they to pass, said Ms Hayut, the reforms would “change the democratic identity of the country beyond recognition.” The changes would mean the removal of any checks on the government’s power, argues Suzie Navot, a constitutional lawyer and vice-president of the Israel Democracy Institute, and the way in which Mr Netanyahu’s government is going about it, “on a political whim”, would represent “a true threat to democracy”. The plan has rejuvenated Israel’s fragmented and demoralised centre-left opposition. On January 14th around 80,000 protesters gathered in central Tel Aviv and other cities, vowing to fight the government’s plans. Mr Netanyahu is undeterred. The following day he described the November election as “the mother of all protests” and claimed millions had voted to reform the legal system. “We are not even touching the Supreme Court’s powers of administrative review,” insists the chairman of the Knesset Law Committee, Simcha Rothman. Mr Rothman, of Religious Zionism, a far-right bloc, dismisses as ridiculous cries that these changes will make Israel less democratic. He claims that no other court in the world uses a comparable “reasonableness” test or controls its appointments in the manner of the Israeli one. In the past the independence of Israel’s legal system has allowed it to hold the government, as well as the country’s highest leaders, to account. One former prime minister was convicted of corruption. A president was jailed for sexual assault. Mr Netanyahu himself is facing charges of bribery and fraud. The proposed changes would not affect his case directly, but it is hard to avoid the impression that he has returned to office with a personal score to settle with the judiciary. In the past Mr Netanyahu has presented himself as a champion of the Supreme Court’s independence. Whether he has genuinely changed his mind or done so for political expediency, that position no longer suits him. ■