For further recommendations, try our annual round-up of the best books, films, TV, music, podcasts and more. Money Men. By Dan McCrum. Bantam Press; 352 pages; £20 The dramatic story of the demise of Wirecard, once one of Europe’s brightest tech stars. The author, a journalist at the Financial Times, was one of a small band of sceptics who believed the firm was a giant fraud. Faced with a vicious counter-attack from the company and its spies, and the German establishment’s reluctance to accept a national champion could be a sham, they had a long wait for vindication. Chip War. By Chris Miller. Scribner; 464 pages; $30. Simon & Schuster; £20 Semiconductors are central to modern life—they power everything from advanced weapons systems to toasters—but the supply chain is alarmingly fragile. Many countries see chips as a strategic asset. This timely book shows how economic, geopolitical and technological forces shaped an essential industry. Dead in the Water. By Matthew Campbell and Kit Chellel. Portfolio; 288 pages; $27. Atlantic Books; £18.99 Books about merchant shipping are rarely so gripping, but this one looks at what really happened when pirates attacked the Brillante Virtuoso in the Gulf of Aden in 2011. A startling tale of fraud and impunity. The Power Law. By Sebastian Mallaby. Penguin Press; 496 pages; $30. Allen Lane; £25Venture capitalists are often accused of prioritising growth at all costs, so feeding a recklessly aggressive capitalist culture. In this authoritative book a former journalist at The Economist—and husband of the current editor-in-chief—acknowledges the industry’s shortcomings but eloquently defends its achievements. For Profit. By William Magnuson. Basic Books; 368 pages; $32 and £25A magnificent history of corporations, stretching from the societas publicanorum of ancient Rome, through Renaissance Florence, the Age of Discovery and the might of American industrial capitalism to Silicon Valley. Private enterprises have produced some of humankind’s greatest achievements. But often the most dazzling overstep the mark, leaving a trail of debris and distrust behind them. Butler to the World. By Oliver Bullough. St Martin’s Press; 288 pages; $28.99. Profile Books; £20 After making a decision to attract footloose international capital after the second world war, Britain went on to roll out the welcome mat for plutocrats and oligarchs. This is an indictment of the lawyers, pr firms and others who help siphon dirty money through London’s banks and property market. Slouching Towards Utopia. By J. Bradford DeLong. Basic Books; 624 pages; $35 and £30 Written with wit, style and a formidable command of detail, this book places the successes and disasters of the 20th century in their economic context. In doing so, it provides insights into how things have gone wrong in more recent years—and what must go right if catastrophe is to be avoided in the current century. Power Failure. By William Cohan. Portfolio; 816 pages; $40. Allen Lane; £35 A monumental study of the firm founded in 1892 as the General Electric Company. Its story makes clear how important brilliant people are to business success—and how their brilliance can sometimes become a dangerous vulnerability. ■ For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter