IT WAS THE novel that made Norman Mailer famous, aged just 25. Published in 1948, “The Naked and the Dead” was based on his experiences as a US Army rifleman in the Philippines, and astonished readers with its portrait of war’s random violence and the pungency of its language. Though banned from many American libraries and in several other countries, it was widely hailed as a victory for free speech and topped the New York Times’s bestseller list for 11 weeks. Britain’s attorney general condemned it as “foul, lewd and revolting”; George Orwell believed it “the best book of the last war yet”. Such was the divisiveness of Mailer’s work. It remains so on the centenary of his birth, which falls on January 31st. It was as a journalist that Mailer excelled, chronicling what he called “the dream life of the nation” and documenting its chaos, profligacy and evils. American politics was a favourite subject and he wrote most bracingly about it in the 1960s, as he repeatedly mused on the presidency of John F. Kennedy and the Vietnam war. Another preoccupation was boxing, which he likened to writing in its need for “discipline and intelligence and restraint”. “The Fight” (1975) documented the so-called Rumble in the Jungle, which pitted Muhammad Ali against George Foreman, and celebrated Ali’s win as the triumph of art over power. Mailer was prolific in other fields, both public and private; besides publishing poetry and producing biographies of Marilyn Monroe and Pablo Picasso, he was interviewed more than 700 times and wrote 45,000 letters. Since his death in 2007, his reputation has declined. Now he is remembered mainly for his personal failings, which were legion: serially unfaithful and an inveterate risk-taker, he revelled in confrontation. Mailer required life to be vivid, and his attempts to make it so could be hot-headed, the worst being when he stabbed his wife, Adele Morales (the second of six spouses). This happened in 1960, at a gathering where he planned to announce a characteristically provocative campaign to be mayor of New York. The guests were a volatile mix; at four in the morning an agitated Mailer confronted his wife, responding to her taunts with two jabs of a penknife. He punctured her pericardium, but the attack wasn’t fatal, except to their marriage. (Morales did not press charges, in order to protect their children.) In her memoir, “The Last Party” (1997), she said that it took 28 years for Mailer to manage a single sentence of apology. Feuds occurred frequently, his most notorious being with a fellow novelist, Gore Vidal, who wrote an unfavourable review of his book about feminism, “The Prisoner of Sex” (1971). Six years later Mailer saw him at a glitzy party and punched him in the face (to which Vidal responded, “Norman, once again words have failed you”). Many of his views—for instance, that it is “easier to be a homosexual than a heterosexual”—now seem odious. His belligerence was matched by an appetite for publicity, which made him a perennial subject for gossip columns. Once, when he needed money, he even charged guests to attend his birthday party. The books resemble their author: flawed, unpredictable, grandiose and often overblown, sometimes noxious. Yet their range is remarkable. He published more than 40 and tried a different style in each. They include such curios as “Ancient Evenings” (1983), a novel set 3,000 years ago in Egypt, and “The Gospel According to the Son” (1997), which represents itself as Jesus Christ’s autobiography. Among the more compelling is “The Armies of the Night” (1968), a lyrical account of a protest against the Vietnam war. Placing himself at the heart of the event, but referring to himself in the third person, Mailer blends the techniques of factual reporting and fiction. The book’s subtitle is “History as a Novel / The Novel as History”, and such genre-bending is a feature of his work. Mailer’s greatest achievement may well be “The Executioner’s Song” (1979). A 400,000-word chronicle of the life of Gary Gilmore, a convicted murderer, it too blurs the distinction between documentary and novel. Here the virtuosic Mailer gives way to a more coolly observant one who captures the emptiness of Gilmore’s world with unnerving accuracy. In accommodating and attending to so many others—family, friends, lawyers, reporters, Gilmore—Mailer’s own voice was never quieter. It is a typically vast, audacious and dangerous project. ■