For further recommendations, try our annual round-up of the best books, films, TV, music, podcasts and more. The Song of the Cell. By Siddhartha Mukherjee. Scribner; 496 pages; $26.99. Bodley Head; £22 A tour d’horizon of cell theory, by a clinical oncologist and professor of that subject at Columbia University. Cases from the author’s own career illustrate the results of both cellular understanding and the lack of it. The result is part history lesson, part biology lesson and part reminder of how science itself actually proceeds. Elusive. By Frank Close. Basic Books; 304 pages; $26. Allen Lane; £25 A compelling account of the long search for the Higgs boson: its existence was predicted in 1964, but it did not show its face to the world until 2012. This is also a biography of Peter Higgs, the shy physicist after whom the particle was named. An Immense World. By Ed Yong. Random House; 464 pages; $30. Vintage; £17.99 Human senses can only perceive a fraction of the energy and information moving through the world. Animals manage much more: some birds can sense magnetic fields, bees can see ultraviolet light and bats perceive their surroundings using sound waves. By examining how such creatures sense their environments, this book lifts the shroud on previously invisible dimensions of the world itself. Beyond Measure. By James Vincent. W.W. Norton; 432 pages; $32.50. Faber; £18.99Humans are list-makers, this deeply researched history of measurement argues. From Aristotle’s “Categories” to the Linnaean taxonomy of biology, people are splitters, not lumpers, forever seeking to parse and quantify the world. The Equality Machine. By Orly Lobel. PublicAffairs; 368 pages; $30 and £25 This author agrees with those who fear artificial intelligence can be biased. But, in a brilliant act of intellectual jiu-jitsu, she argues that the answer is not to slow the technology, but to speed it up to solve those defects and achieve social progress. This Mortal Coil. By Andrew Doig. Bloomsbury; 384 pages; $34 and £25 A biochemist at the University of Manchester provides a surprisingly upbeat history of death—and points to medical marvels that may lie ahead. An empowering story of human ingenuity. ■ For more on the latest books, films, TV shows, albums and controversies, sign up to Plot Twist, our weekly subscriber-only newsletter