FOOTBALL NEWS these days—at least about the English Premier League—seems to concern money as much as matches. This week INEOS, mostly owned by Sir Jim Ratcliffe, a billionaire Manchester United fan, said it wanted to buy the club. (Though principally a chemicals firm, INEOS already owns clubs in France and Switzerland.) United’s other fans would cheer a deal as heartily as a last-minute winner at the Stretford End. Many of them loathe the current owners, the Glazer family, who have done pretty well financially even as success on the field has dried up, but are now willing to sell. Reports say United might cost INEOS £5bn ($6.2bn), plus more to upgrade Old Trafford stadium. For England’s top clubs there is never a shortage of well-heeled would-be buyers. (Sir Jim, despite his allegiance, also tried to buy Chelsea last year, before it went to an American-led consortium.) Much of the attraction for investors lies in the huge sums flowing in from broadcasting, tickets, sponsorship and merchandise. Although the covid-19 pandemic dented football’s fortunes, as matches were first cancelled and then played in empty stadiums, an annual review of clubs’ finances across Europe by Deloitte, an accounting and consulting firm, finds that revenues have just about recovered (see left-hand chart). And among leading teams in the Premier League—already Europe’s richest domestic competition—they have bounced back especially strongly. According to Deloitte, the total revenues of the top 20 clubs in Europe added up to €9.2bn ($10.4bn) in the 2021-22 season, a rise of 13% from the previous year and almost as much as in 2018-19, the last full season before the coronavirus struck. That was mainly due to the return of fans. Matchday revenues, from tickets, corporate hospitality and so forth, went up from just €111m in 2020-21 to €1.4bn. At the 11 English clubs in the top 20, total revenues rose by 19%, to €4.8bn. Compared with continental teams, they gained from a stronger pound against the euro (their sterling income climbed by 14%); but they benefited too from a rise in commercial revenues—eg, from new sponsorship deals and the resumption of concerts and other non-football events at their grounds. The Premier League also filled three of the first four slots in Deloitte’s revenue ranking (see right-hand chart). The list was topped, for the second year running, by the champions, Manchester City, who on and off the field have gone from strength to strength since being bought by Abu Dhabi’s ruling family in 2008. City’s neighbours across Manchester climbed from fifth to fourth, but were still overtaken by their other fierce rivals, Liverpool, who enjoyed a commercial as well as a sporting boost from their run to last year’s UEFA Champions League final. Barcelona and Real Madrid, Spain’s twin giants, are among the clubs where revenues are not yet back to pre-pandemic levels. Barcelona tumbled to seventh in the Deloitte league, from fourth in 2020-21—mainly because the team has become weaker. Last season Barça failed to reach the knockout stages of the Champions League for the first time in 18 years, which cost them broadcast income. (They have flopped again in 2022-23.) Barça can at least take some comfort from the performance of their women’s team. Runners-up in their own Champions’ League in 2021-22, Barcelona Femení were the biggest earners among European women’s teams (a ranking reported by Deloitte for the first time). But at just €7.7m, their tally is still a tiny fraction of the enormous amounts hauled in by the men. ■