ON JANUARY 25TH Germany beat England in a shoot-out—but not at a football tournament. This was hockey: the quarter-final of the men’s World Cup in India. Hockey (field hockey, to North Americans) has much else in common with football: each team has 11 players, the idea is to propel a ball into a goal and the scores are of similar magnitude. Both can fluctuate from the frenetic to the soporific, even in the same match. Both mix teamwork and outrageous individual skill, such as a perfectly weighted pass or a mesmerising dribble. But in popularity, there is no comparison. Even in Belgium and Germany, not many will know that their national teams will meet in Sunday’s World Cup final. Hockey may be played in 137 countries, but it is a niche affair. North Americans prefer its violent cousin played on ice (though that too is slipping in popularity). In many countries it is an amateur sport. The International Hockey Federation (FIH), the sport’s governing body, estimates 30m people pick up a stick regularly; in contrast, hundreds of millions play football. The financial gulf is even bigger. The FIH’s latest available accounts show it earned $12m from media rights and other sources in 2021. That is a pittance next to the revenues of FIFA, its footballing equivalent, which raked in $766m that year, even without a World Cup. And that is before the huge sums flooding into football’s richest clubs and leagues—to which hockey has no equivalent—are totted up. If there is a route to more popularity and cash, it probably runs through India, a huge market with hockey pedigree—and would take inspiration from cricket rather than football. For years before and after independence, hockey was the country’s most popular sport, and India was the game’s superpower. Between 1928 and 1980, the national team won eight Olympic gold medals. (India has won only two other golds in any sport since—in the 10m air rifle in 2008 and javelin in 2021.) Pakistan was once a titan too, winning three Olympic titles. But the last was in 1984. It did not even qualify for this World Cup. Big changes to hockey contributed to the South Asian decline. In 1976 the sport began to change its playing surface, from grass to astroturf. The slick surface allows the ball to zip around, favouring speed and fitness more than skill with the stick, in which Indian and Pakistani players specialised. Astroturf was also expensive—and hence inaccessible to many poor Indians and Pakistanis. The abolition of the offside rule in 1992 was another blow, making long, lofted passes a quicker route to the goal than dribbling. Meanwhile, the subcontinent’s hockey malaise coincided with an improvement on the cricket field, which sucked up both attention and resources. India’s obsession with cricket now sustains the sport globally. So, like their cricketing confreres, hockey’s administrators are also pinning their hopes on the country. Three of the last four men’s World Cups have taken place there; ten of the event’s 15 sponsors are Indian. Before this tournament, a Belgian player grumbled about travelling to India again but acknowledged that it is the only “country that can fill stadiums with 20,000” regularly. Attempts to follow cricket have so far sputtered. In 2013 the Hockey India League, featuring teams owned by Bollywood celebrities and business honchos, was launched. It was intended to be hockey’s version of the glitzy Indian Premier League (IPL), which has transformed cricket. It fizzled out in 2017, as franchises struggled financially, but there are now plans to revive it. Meanwhile, other efforts are in hand to resuscitate the sport. The eastern state of Odisha is leading the way. Hockey has always been popular there, as it has in the rest of India’s poor, tribal belt. (One theory is that wood for makeshift hockey sticks is readily available in nearby forests.) The state government has splurged 1bn rupees ($12m) on sponsoring India’s national teams and another 2.6bn rupees to build the facilities and venues for this World Cup. The success of all this may ultimately hinge on the fortunes of the national team. Cricket took off after India won the World Cup in 1983; the IPL came a quarter of a century later. The national hockey team has improved in recent years, securing a bronze medal at the Tokyo Olympics in 2021, and is ranked sixth in the world. But at this World Cup it lost to New Zealand in a play-off for a place in the quarter-finals (see picture). There’s a lot of work to do before the next chance to revive past glories: the Paris Olympics in 2024.■