THE FREQUENT televised speeches to his country’s allies by Volodymyr Zelensky, the president of Ukraine, have a familiar refrain: send us more weapons. Talking to his own countrymen on the evening of January 20th, he tried to counter a sense of disappointment. Hours earlier Western officials at a defence summit at America’s Ramstein military base, in Germany, had failed to agree to send Ukraine German-made Leopard tanks, the most prominent item on its wish-list. Mr Zelensky vowed to continue pushing NATO countries to do so. “Yes, we will still have to fight for the supply of modern tanks,” he said, “but every day we make it more obvious there is no alternative.” Mr Zelensky praised a number of NATO allies who have recently agreed on new arms deliveries to Ukraine. He singled out America, Britain, Estonia, the Netherlands and Poland, among others. But he had no kind words for Germany, which continues to block deliveries of Leopards. A number of European countries, including Poland and Finland, have offered to supply Ukraine with some of their own. But that requires approval from Germany, which produces the tanks. After months of entreaties, Germany is still hesitating. “We all cannot say today when a decision [on the Leopards] will come and what it will look like,” the newly minted German defence minister, Boris Pistorius, said on the sidelines of the summit.  Ukraine needs tanks to resist what its officials view as an imminent Russian offensive. It also wants to claw back territory occupied by the Russians in Donbas, in the country’s east, and in the south, including Crimea. “The Russians want to regain the strategic initiative, and they want to advance on some parts of the front line,” says Kostiantyn Mashovets, an analyst and Ukrainian army colonel. “Even a limited quantity of tanks like the Leopards would help Ukraine prevent them [from doing so].” Yet Mr Zelensky spent less time bemoaning the lack of Leopards than welcoming the other kit he is receiving. Ukraine’s pleas for aid have been richly rewarded of late. Among a recent flurry of pledges from around a dozen allies, including America, are promises of long-range ammunition, helicopters and air-defence systems. Those followed announcements earlier in January that America, France and Germany would send Ukraine infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs), namely A2M2 Bradleys, AMX10-RCs and Marders respectively. Britain has been especially forthcoming. On January 14th its government announced it would send 14 of its Challenger 2 tanks to Ukraine. That made it the first country to promise main battle tanks (MBTs), which are better-armoured and more powerful than the lighter, faster IFVs. Britain then joined ten of its European allies at a summit in Estonia on January 19th to discuss further military aid. There, it announced an additional shipment that included 600 Brimstone anti-tank missiles. Britain’s defence secretary, Ben Wallace, said he wanted to help Ukraine to “dominate the battlefield”. Others at the meeting in Estonia were more humble. Denmark said it would send 19 French-manufactured Caesar howitzers, a long-range artillery system. The Czechs promised to increase production of howitzers, heavy ammunition and armoured personnel-carriers (APCs). Estonia also pledged dozens of howitzers, both the Western-made 155mm FH-70 model and the Soviet-designed 122mm D-30, as well as artillery-support vehicles and anti-tank grenade launchers. Between them, Latvia and Lithuania offered Stinger air-defence systems, L-70 anti-aircraft guns, Mi-8 and Mi-17 helicopters, and drones. Poland’s statement was more intriguing. It pledged S-60 anti-aircraft guns, along with 70,000 pieces of ammunition. That may seem relatively modest. But Poland also said it was ready to donate a company (about 14) of its Leopard 2 tanks. And it proposed establishing a coalition of Leopard-owning countries to donate more in the future. There are thought to be around 2,000 of the tanks across Europe. Germany’s failure at the Ramstein summit to enable such donations means the proposals are still on hold. Olaf Scholz, Germany’s chancellor, has said he will let Leopards flow to Ukraine only if America sends its own MBTs, specifically the M1 Abrams. On January 19th America announced another huge new military package for Ukraine, worth some $2.5bn. It includes nearly 60 Bradley IFVs, 90 Stryker APCs and more than 50 mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicles. But no Abrams. As a sweetener, Germany announced at Ramstein that it would allow other countries to train Ukrainian troops to operate and service the Leopards. Colonel Mashovets suggests such training may have already begun, possibly in Poland. There is an increased sense of urgency among Ukraine’s allies. Sweden has agreed to send the Archer artillery system, a type of howitzer that Ukraine has long coveted, as well as CV-90 armoured vehicles and NLAW portable anti-tank missiles. Its neighbour Finland confirmed on January 20th that it will send some €400m ($435m) in defence support. Canada promised 200 APCs. Mr Zelensky is clearly frustrated that Leopards are not on their way. But he may not have to wait much longer.■