Every weekday this year we have been quizzing our World in Brief readers on topics that they could expect to read about in The Economist. Over the Christmas period we will publish ten collections of quizzes from our archive, each containing 10 questions. The challenge is to find all the correct answers—and to identify the connecting theme for each set of five questions. Make a note of your answers: the correct ones will be published along with a new set of questions tomorrow. If you missed the questions yesterday, you can read them here. The daily quiz will continue in 2023, in World in Brief, too. Set 17Which of the 50 US states is sometimes known as the “copper state”?Who is currently chief executive of the Blackrock fund management group?Which rock group is best known for the songs “Alive and Kicking” and “Don’t You (Forget About Me)”?What term, which refers to passing a point of no return, relates to an incident in the career of Julius Caesar?Which best-selling book, written by Angela Duckworth, explains how success can be achieved by a combination of passion and persistence?What theme connects these answers? What theme connects these answers? Set 18 What term, developed in the US in the late 19th century, is used for a ground beef patty served as a main course with gravy (not in a bun)?What trophy is given to the winners of the annual rugby match between England and Scotland?Which musical, written by Claude-Michel Schönberg and Alain Boublil, was based on the Puccini opera Madame Butterfly?What was the name of the short-lived republic that existed in present-day Netherlands from 1795 to 1806?What is the name for a bright red, spicy curry sauce often served with raita? What theme connects these answers? … And these are the answers to yesterday’s questions: Set 15: Mirage, New York-New York, Luxor, The Twelve Caesars, Sahara. The theme is Las Vegas casinos: The Mirage, New York, New York, Luxor, Caesars Palace and SAHARA. Set 16: The Count of Monte Cristo, Larry Bird, Bert, Oscar Hammerstein and fortune cookies. The theme is Sesame Street characters: Count von Count, Big Bird, Bert, Oscar the Grouch and Cookie Monster.