Two years ago on a winter morning in Harare, Tsitsi Dangarembga, Zimbabwe’s most acclaimed living novelist, rose at dawn. She climbed the stairs to her second-floor writing studio and retrieved a handwritten sign. For weeks, she had been mounting a solo campaign for the release of Hopewell Chin’ono, an investigative journalist, and, more generally, for the government to take its responsibilities more seriously. Zimbabweans were suffering. The majority of them were not formally employed. Most people believed that covid-19 had hit the country far harder than the official death toll suggested. Dangarembga’s husband drove her to a busy crossroads and dropped her off. The government had threatened to arrest any violent protesters. He followed her in his car, filming, in case she needed evidence she was behaving within the law. Wearing blue padded trousers over her jeans, a blue-and-white windbreaker and a knitted orange beret with a hole in it, Dangarembga, aged 61, began to march. Zimbabweans had vowed to come out en masse that day to protest against the government. But except for one friend, nobody joined her. Many would later say on Twitter that they had been too afraid to take to the streets. As Dangarembga proceeded in her lonely protest, a van pulled up alongside and a camera crew from Al Jazeera tumbled out. Not long after, an armoured vehicle hove into view, and disgorged gun-toting Zimbabwean policemen, who arrested Dangarembga on a charge of inciting violence. This was the first time she had been detained. Dangarembga believed she was seized that day because, after decades, she had finally drawn the attention of the world. Her latest novel, “This Mournable Body”, had just been nominated for the Booker prize, the world’s leading award for novels written in English. Since its inception in 1969, the prize has celebrated writing from the Commonwealth. (Only in 2013 did all English-language writers become eligible.) In its first decades, Africa was largely represented by white writers: Doris Lessing, Nadine Gordimer and J.M. Coetzee received multiple nominations. But since the publication of Chimamanda Ngozi Adiche’s “Half a Yellow Sun” in 2006, global interest in African fiction has surged. Works by Yaa Gyasi, who was born in Ghana, and Tomi Adeyemi, a Nigerian-American fantasy author, have recently made the New York Times bestseller list. The Booker has also begun to recognise black African writing. Both of Chigozie Obioma’s novels, parables set in Nigeria, have been shortlisted for the prize. NoViolet Bulawayo, another Zimbabwean, made the shortlist in 2013 and again last year. But among these writers, Dangarembga stands out. The new wave of African writers often produces speculative fiction or conjures preternaturally savvy child narrators in touch with special powers. Dangarembga writes in a starkly realist vein. Her characters are embittered and weighed down by shame. And unlike many of her peers, she chose for decades to remain in her country, even as people’s freedoms were threatened and food became scarce. Many leading African writers now write about their homes from a distance. Ngugi wa Thiong’o, a Kenyan author regularly tipped for the Nobel Prize in Literature, teaches at a university in California. Obioma lectures in Nebraska. Dangarembga’s decision to live most of her life in Zimbabwe has enabled her to bear witness to the country’s recent history of corruption and authoritarianism. “For me, my protest and my writing run parallel,” she told me. “This Mournable Body” documents the gruelling reality of everyday life in Harare. “When I think, ‘Why am I in my personal situation? Why do I feel as I do?’, it’s the situation in my country,” she said. Even being under arrest – she was kept overnight in a cell still damp from other prisoners’ urine – “is a way to know. You come to know things you would not know otherwise.” But her choice to bear witness hasn’t altogether impressed her own countrymen. When I went to Harare a year and a half ago, the newspapermen and novelists I met – many of whom were themselves struggling with poverty and government threats to free speech – considered Dangarembga’s decision to live in Zimbabwe, even her anti-government protest, to count against her. They argue that her vision is warped by the very morally degrading conditions that she purports to document uncompromisingly. Since she released “This Mournable Body”, Dangarembga has been inundated with plaudits from overseas. In 2021 she won the prestigious Peace Prize of the German Book Trade and, this year, a Windham Campbell prize, which, at $165,000, is one of the most valuable literature awards in the world. Yet Dangarembga’s work is hard to find in her hometown. When I was in Harare I visited three big bookshops. They stocked plenty of works by older African writers like Ngugi, but I couldn’t find anything by Dangarembga, though her books aren’t banned. John Masuku, a radio journalist, claimed that “to the ordinary Zimbabwean, Tsitsi Dangarembga’s novels are nothing.” People in richer countries tend to lionise authors who write from privation. James Wood, a literary critic, has described a view commonly held by American writers he knows: “Coming up with anything to write about can be difficult when you are allowed to write about anything. A day in which the most arduous choice [is] between ‘grande’ and ‘tall’ does not conduce to literary strenuousness.” But Dangarembga herself has doubts that suffering writers produce greater art. Echoing her critics, she worries that she had developed blind spots by taking the measures she needed to survive. She posed the question to me: could a society become so repressed and so ashamed of itself that it becomes impossible to write truthfully about it? In photographs from the protest of July 2020, Dangarembga’s fogged glasses and black face-mask made her look like a firefighter heading into a blaze. When we met in person, I noted her small frame, fine braids and warm eyes. Nothing about her suggested someone who relishes confrontation, and her few close friends characterise her as shy. She has a childlike way of sitting, crooking up one knee and tucking the other foot under her bottom. When I asked her personal questions – about the motives behind her protest and her Christian faith – she acted like she barely understood them herself, laughing so winningly it was only later that I realised she’d avoided answering my questions. Dangarembga’s husband, the German film-maker Olaf Koschke, described her as someone whose focus can get so intense she forgets her bodily needs. Often, she will only remember to eat an austere breakfast of fruit and ginger tea if he brings it up to her writing studio. The studio could be a monastic cell: a bare room furnished with little more than a desk, an upright piano and a disorganised shelf of teach-yourself-German books. When she was a teenager, Dangarembga loved to act and sing, and Koschke encourages her to play the piano – to cultivate any hobbies, really. But he also told me she is ferociously competitive and abandons activities when she realises she might not excel at them. Dangarembga attributed this evasiveness to shame. Her life, she told me, has been marked by the experience of being shamed, so much so that tiny embarrassments like stumbling over a German word – she still struggles with the language – can feel disproportionately “burdensome”. Each one, she explains, constitutes a re-enactment in miniature of much larger “degrading experiences that have acted to destroy me”. When Dangarembga was born in 1959, her country still had the name the British Empire gave it: Southern Rhodesia. Even black Rhodesians who criticised colonial rule, like her parents, aspired to anglicise themselves. Her parents moved to London to study for master’s degrees in education when Dangarembga was three. But she and her brother didn’t live with them. Instead, she was placed with a foster family in Dover, a port town over 100km from London. Dangarembga believes she has suppressed some of her memories from the period. She is uncertain about whether her parents suffered from financial constraints and regretted shipping her off, or if they thought that living with a white family would do her good. In “Black and Female”, a book of essays published in August, she writes only that when she was dropped off, “I don’t remember whether [I] cried.” She does remember, however, that the two years she spent in Dover felt like a “guillotine” slicing through her. She couldn’t sleep, and for the first time, she became aware of her colour. She told me she found it incomprehensible that children in her nursery didn’t want to be friends with her until the only boy who would “walk out of school with me and hold my hand” turned to her one afternoon and said hopefully, “Maybe if I keep holding your hand long enough, it will turn white!” Dangarembga remembers being touched by the boy’s “good will”. But she was left with a feeling that there was something wrong with her body. Two years later her parents returned to Southern Rhodesia to teach at a missionary-run multiracial high school. That year Rhodesia’s white leaders unilaterally declared independence from Britain, which had required its colonies to implement one-man-one-vote in anticipation of its retreat from imperial rule. The rogue Rhodesian government tightened segregation and banned nascent black-liberation movements from publishing freely. White Rhodesians, who never made up more than 8% of the country’s population, lived in relative luxury with black servants waiting on them. Nonetheless, Dangarembga remembers an intense feeling of relief on returning to the southern African landscape. “The sky, and the quality of the sun – it was just so clear and so strong. Things on the ground sparkled and reflected it,” she told me. But her second-class status became starkly apparent. The drama club at her school staged “The Merchant of Venice”, which has a character of colour, the Prince of Morocco. A white girl was cast in the role and Dangarembga played one of her mute slaves. It was hard for her to learn what a more equitable world might look like. In the mid-1960s the liberation movement, in which Robert Mugabe was a rising star, began to oppose the white regime more forcefully. But the government censored news of the struggle, especially on the “African service”, the radio programmes for black listeners. Its hosts read stories published by the Rhodesia Literature Bureau, a government department that funded black authors to write novels depicting compliant natives: naive, traditional and uninterested in competing with the colonial elite. These minatory fables chided characters who tried to escape poverty for abandoning their families. Teaching and medicine were two of the few prestigious careers that black Rhodesians were allowed to pursue. In Dover, Dangarembga had got a reputation as a difficult, sullen child. To prove her detractors wrong, “I thought I would want to do something that was useful to other people,” she said. She wasn’t interested in teaching, so, “by default”, struck on medicine. She sat her A-levels in 1976; her results were good enough to win a place at Cambridge. “It was a huge honour and a status symbol to be educated abroad.” She also set herself another challenge: to be treated as worthy of befriending, which hadn’t happened in Dover. But her return to Britain turned into a life-defining trauma. There were almost no other Africans on her course and her classmates showed a prurient interest in the liberation war that had escalated in her country. Those on the left told her it was “bloody cool” that she came from a “war zone”. She didn’t have money to fly home for the holidays, but students were not permitted to remain in halls outside term. To afford a bed in a grubby Cambridge hostel, she worked as a waitress and ironed other students’ clothes; for two Christmases in a row, she had to lock herself in her room as drunk men “banged repeatedly on my door, wanting to get in”. The terror made her “cave in emotionally”, she told me, and she developed an eating disorder. At that point the administrators relented and allowed her to stay over holidays in university accommodation. “I had to fall lower than them. Then their attitude became, ‘Oh, you poor thing. Now we’ll do you a favour.’” In 1980, on her first trip home for two years, Dangarembga visited Salisbury, as the capital was then called. The city is built around an imposing red-clay hill, but to Dangarembga its beauty resided in its buildings: in the towers of the Anglican cathedral, the imposing Edwardian government complexes, the department stores and the luxurious quad of the university, which had been dominated by white students. The previous year the Rhodesian government, exhausted by war, had agreed to allow democratic elections, paving the way for black rule. Dangarembga was astonished to see black students mounting plays on the university lawn. She never returned to Cambridge. “Why would I want to go back?” she thought at the time. Freedom had finally come to her homeland. Throughout much of the 1960s and 1970s, Britain and other Western countries had imposed sanctions on Rhodesia. Paradoxically, this temporarily transformed the country into a regional economic powerhouse. The white regime built up homegrown banking, manufacturing and agricultural sectors to replace what they couldn’t import. When Mugabe became prime minister and renamed the country Zimbabwe in 1980, he took advantage of this wealth. An erudite schoolteacher who had racked up six university degrees before becoming prime minister, he ploughed money into education. Primary-school enrolment quadrupled. Within five years, the minimum wage had tripled and the government was providing universal health care. Zimbabweans felt like their country was on the verge of greatness. Andrew Meldrum, an Associated Press journalist who moved to Zimbabwe in 1980, remembered the atmosphere as “heady, optimistic, exciting…I’d interview black people and ask, ‘Has your life changed?’ And they’d say proudly, ‘My daughter is now at one of our universities.’” Dangarembga shared this confidence. “I felt the structures of the country were all right, only they had not been run by the right people.” While in Cambridge, she had made a few trips to London and visited black Rhodesian expatriates. Many seemed to have physically withered thanks to psychological stress or had turned to drugs. Wanting to heal the “whole body”, she adjusted her ambition to be a physician and enrolled in a psychology degree at the University of Zimbabwe. When they weren’t studying, she and her friends would go on demonstrations. “I can no longer remember what we were protesting against,” she said. The freedom to protest was its own joy. And she had great expectations for her own work. Playwriting was a long-standing interest. In childhood she had put on Christmas plays with her cousins, and as a student she wrote and directed two plays: “The Lost of the Soil” followed a black Zimbabwean adrift in England; “She No Longer Weeps” considered a woman giving birth to a baby out of wedlock. The university’s Great Hall seated an audience of 1,000 and the plays sold out. Dangarembga had also always written stories in notebooks, often tales of girls like herself. In her free time, she started to write a novel that deliberately rejected archetypes promoted by the Rhodesia Literature Bureau. Those women had no autonomy. “Their sexuality was utilitarian. They wanted money or status and needed to be saved by men and made honest,” she told me, where “honest” was a euphemism for “obedient”. Dangarembga wanted “Nervous Conditions” to reflect the complexities of her inner life. She wrote feverishly by hand, inspired by black American authors such as Toni Morrison and Alice Walker, who “fed my imagination with a different kind of black female character”. The narrator of the novel, a country girl named Tambu, starts her own business selling corn and then lives with an abusive uncle while studying at a missionary-run school. Never had a Zimbabwean novel written in English featured a woman determined – so determined that she barely bothers to defend herself to doubters – to match or exceed the men around her. When the London-based, feminist Women’s Press published “Nervous Conditions” in 1988, it won the Commonwealth Writers Prize for Best African Book. Leading Zimbabwean intellectuals saw their country reflected in Dangarembga’s portrait of Tambu. They were determined to exceed the West in manifesting progressive values such as racial equity and feminism. The first black Zimbabwean woman to publish a full-length novel in English was cause for celebration. The book entered the school curriculum and doctoral dissertations still claim Dangarembga actually won the main Commonwealth Writers Prize. According to Meldrum, all the intellectuals in Harare, black and white, read it. At parties, they’d exclaim to each other, “Tsitsi did it!” But all was not well below the surface. Mugabe sustained the state of emergency which the white regime had imposed. In the mid-1980s his army massacred at least 20,000 members of the Ndebele group, a minority he accused of plotting against him. Many journalists censored themselves, wanting to avoid giving credence to the hackneyed depiction of Africa as a continent of paranoid strongmen and internecine warfare. Dangarembga claims she was “unaware of the massacres” at the time they occurred. “I didn’t have a radio. I didn’t have a TV.” Her contemporaries remember rumours of atrocities circulating. But, says Dangarembga, “for people whose core business wasn’t to look for such information, you wouldn’t have known” the extent of the truth. Mugabe’s party, Zanu-PF, didn’t get rid of the Rhodesia Literature Bureau, either. The new Zimbabwe Literature Bureau funded “patriotic histories” that erased inconvenient facts, such as the role played by Mugabe’s Ndebele rival in the liberation struggle. Percy Zvomuya, a Zimbabwean essayist, told me that, in the 1990s, “Nervous Conditions” was taught in secondary schools as an upbeat text: Tambu overcomes patriarchal attitudes to take the place at high school intended for her elder brother. In truth, the novel reads far more ambiguously. It eerily predicts, in allegory, Zimbabwe’s decline after the 1980s. Several times I asked Dangarembga if she was aware of the book’s foreboding undercurrent when she wrote it. Not really, she said. “Perhaps I intuited problems. I myself didn’t want to face things as they were.” White people hardly appear in “Nervous Conditions”. But the book shows how the degrading grip of colonial values and black self-hatred persist. Tambu’s conceited and violent uncle declares that Tambu’s parents will remain poor because they didn’t have a “white wedding”. In planning one, he obsesses over the sartorial detail, as if putting Zimbabweans in tuxedos and beaded gowns might inoculate them against every disappointment. Tambu recoils from her uncle, feeling that his attitude isn’t any different from believing in traditional magic. Yet she herself never gives up seeking her own fetish object – a British-style school-leavers certificate – even as she watches her English-educated cousin, Nyasha, succumb to an eating disorder as she tries to prove herself to be a Westernised woman. As the intoxicating 1980s gave way to the 1990s, a similar mix of contempt for and envy of the West gripped Zimbabwe’s president. Though Mugabe had long been regarded as a nationalist, he kept up an almost superstitious belief in colonial rituals. In the early years of his rule he obsessed over winning British approval. He required his judges to sport cravats and horsehair wigs. Stan Higgins, a journalist, remembers covering a meeting in 1993 between Mugabe and Princess Diana. Mugabe “was literally trembling, quailing in his seat”. After the success of her novel, Dangarembga wanted to write film scripts. However, she found the purse strings for the arts were, behind the scenes, still held by white people or Westerners. She had to seek money from an American NGO. But the Americans were not interested in funding a Zimbabwean to produce Hollywood-calibre films. They expected her to make crude “edutainment” containing “socially uplifting” messages to satisfy donors who still saw themselves as saviours of the backward and downtrodden. In 1989 Dangarembga enrolled at the German Film and Television Academy in Berlin, hoping the prestigious institution would lend her greater credibility with big production companies. But she says that on the course, she still felt pressured to portray Africans in the conventional way as hapless and victimised. She wanted to make a documentary on “Afro shops”, such as hair salons, that were being opened in Germany. She says that a course instructor told her she should make a film about immigrants being burnt in asylum houses instead. According to Dangarembga, when she insisted on pursuing her idea, she was thrown out of the class and never received a diploma. In the 1990s Zimbabwe began to unravel. The “Jewel of Africa” was, in reality, an economy artificially boosted by sanctions. For a time, loans from the IMF underwrote the expansion of social services. But when repayments fell due in the 1990s, austerity measures and market restructuring destroyed the country’s manufacturing sector. Corruption also gutted the country’s budget. Unemployed Zimbabweans thronged the streets of Harare. Mugabe felt that he had a duty to return prime agricultural land to black Zimbabweans. In 2000, partly to diffuse growing protests, he instigated the violent seizure of white-owned farms. Over the next few years, several dozen white Zimbabweans were killed. Watching these events unfold on television in Berlin, Dangarembga confessed she felt some sympathy with Mugabe. “I agreed some kind of land reform was necessary. [And] three times, I saw the same clip on German TV of a youthful African man throwing a burning log at a white-owned farmhouse. It was presented each time as a different, new and dreadful development. I wrote the TV station a letter to complain.” The station wrote back, claiming the manipulated footage represented its legitimate “interpretation of Zimbabwe”. “I thought it wasn’t healthy for me to be given such ‘interpretations’,” Dangarembga told me. She returned home in 2000, motivated by the feeling that there must be something better happening than Westerners were willing to acknowledge. But by 2007 prices were rising by a catastrophic 50% each month. Unemployment soared and the Zimbabwean dollar imploded. By then, Dangarembga was the mother of three children with Koschke, whom she had met on a trip to Switzerland. Koschke had to beg a dairy-owner for milk and Dangarembga would haul suitcases of cash to the currency black market to obtain American dollars. Still, part of her wanted to believe that the country was not in dire straits. On her return from Germany, she’d travelled through Africa raising money for the Zimbabwe International Film Festival. A Zambian man remarked to her how much he’d admired Zimbabweans in the 1980s. He seemed pleased that Zimbabwe had sunk like other post-colonial countries. “What happened to you?” he sneered. Dangarembga wanted to resist his dismissive attitude. She brought up that encounter to explain why, throughout the 2000s, she retained some faith in Mugabe. She’d had such great expectations for the country. As Dangarembga incurred so many wounds at the hands of white people and the West – including her second novel, “The Book of Not”, which she hated but her London publisher, she says, insisted she release – she had clung to her home country as a place of refuge and redemption. Ultimately, it was not the antics of Mugabe that convinced Dangarembga that Zimbabwe was a shattered country, but the acquiescence of ordinary Zimbabweans. In 2017 Emmerson Mnangagwa, one of Mugabe’s underlings, ousted Mugabe in a coup but perpetuated his repressive style of government. Mnangagwa’s security forces beat people in the streets. That did not entirely surprise Dangarembga. The greater shock came from realising that the three major efforts to dislodge the Zanu-PF government – in 1999, 2009 and 2015 – had failed. Nic Cheeseman, a professor of African politics at the University of Birmingham, defined Zanu-PF’s mechanism of social control as “arbitrary governance”. “It’s not always obvious who’s going to be arrested next,” he told me. “Sometimes by being unpredictable, a government can act with greater terror.” Dangarembga, though, placed blame on the Zimbabwean people for failing to protest in recent years. “We are ashamed we let colonialism happen to us,” she said. “We are ashamed of the brutality of the liberation war, and we are ashamed for supporting Mugabe.” Shame about their own impotence, she argues, gave rise to the impulse to exercise power over weak targets – to “act out a ruinous, enraged and bitter pain” not on the government but on “our own communities”. On weekdays, downtown Harare looks abandoned. Most of the colonial-era department stores now stand vacant. The street lamps’ casings have been wrenched from their poles and hang limp. After the currency’s collapse, desperate Zimbabweans stole the bulbs and the government rarely replaces them. Unlike most African cities, Harare has few street vendors. Not many Zimbabweans can afford to buy a bar of chocolate on impulse. When I visited, a lone man with a wheelbarrow hawked bananas for $1 each across from my hotel. Dollars are the only currency Zimbabweans now trust and, as there are no American coins in circulation, everything, even a single piece of fruit, costs at least a dollar. The atmosphere from day to day can feel oddly peaceable. By now, Zimbabweans of all kinds have adopted a bitterly jocular attitude towards their country’s degradation. Mugabe once jailed a journalist for a tweet that called him “sick”. Now Zanu-PF ministers frequent a hipster burger joint called Pariah State. In “This Mournable Body”, Dangarembga’s latest novel, Tambu is now in her late 30s. She’s equipped with the Western education she desired but is unable to do much with it. She dresses the part but can’t find a husband or a job, and relies on contemptuous relatives for money and housing. The voluble blame she directs at those around her masks her relentless self-reproach. Dangarembga pointed out to me the way her countrymen almost always talk about other Zimbabweans using the distancing “they” or “you” instead of “we” or “I”, as if they’re embarrassed to admit their commonalities. “You know when a friend has too much to drink, but she doesn’t want to say to you, ‘I had too much to drink’? So she puts the failure roundabout, saying, ‘You know how it is when you’ve had too much to drink.’” “This Mournable Body” captures this sense of self-alienation with a second-person narrator. When Tambu lets a toothbrush drop to the floor of her shabby boarding house, she berates herself: “You have not paid sufficient attention.” The novel captures Harare’s cynical mood with heart-breaking verisimilitude. When I landed in the capital, a businessman returning from a trip pointed out a stalled baggage carousel. “That’s how they do things in Zimbabwe,” he chortled, as if he were just a visitor. When Tambu eventually lands a teaching gig, she develops contempt for her young students, even going so far as to beat one up. She lands in a psychiatric hospital. Her ward is full of white Zimbabweans whose psychosis consists of the belief that they live in the old Rhodesia; they stagger through halls shouting at black medical staff like they are butlers. Unsettlingly, Tambu feels relief witnessing and performing colonial roles. The novel suggests that her selfhood was precariously reliant on both resisting and appeasing the judgment of white people. Like two trees that grew entwined, black and white people needed their companion to avoid collapse. It is ironic that Dangarembga’s countrymen can find her honesty shaming and insist she is no better – no less warped or desperate to win attention from white people – than anybody else. In fact, some suggest she may be more tainted. In a country where it’s virtually impossible for anyone to rise, someone whose name floats above the rest automatically becomes untrustworthy. Masuku, the radio journalist, loved “Nervous Conditions”. But he says he began to rethink Dangarembga’s work when she started to protest in 2020. He felt her actions embarrassed less famous writers. They appeared cowardly by contrast but had more to fear in speaking out because they lacked the international renown to protect them from the government’s worst excesses. Speaking more generally, Higgins, the veteran reporter, said he presumed “Johnny-come-latelies” to anti-government activism wrote or protested out of a vain desire for overseas plaudits. “I think to myself, ‘You didn’t mind 20 years ago when I went to prison for my journalism about the Ndebele massacres.’” The decayed Zimbabwean government now functions largely as a massive currency-arbitrage scheme. Well-connected bureaucrats have access to American dollars on international markets at exchange rates they set themselves. Then they sell these dollars on the black market at vast profits. At the shopping centre in Borrowdale, the neighbourhood where many of these bureaucrats live, luxury-car dealerships jostle for space with shops selling $1,000 ottomans. The roads leading away from the centre are lined with sprawling properties. One is Dangarembga’s. She told me the neighbourhood is one of the only places it’s possible to get the quiet she needs in order to write. But Masuku told me he felt that her choice of neighbours compromised her. In his view, Zimbabweans afford only those countrymen who have left the country the right to speak authoritatively about it. He knew that sounded like a paradox. Zimbabweans living in Zimbabwe cannot “trust each other”, he explained. If they are not putting their entire livelihoods on the line to protest, they are complicit. And what talented person would voluntarily stay unless they weren’t also somehow profiting from the country’s misery? He himself was desperate to leave. After Dangarembga was detained by the police in 2020, a Twitter follower commented acidly, “I think she had to beg to be arrested.” Mlondolozi Ndlovu, a young writer, read to me from a WhatsApp chat he maintains with a group of friends. Somebody mentioned Dangarembga. In her criticism of Zimbabweans, Ndlovu’s friend said she sounded “white” these days: “Is she being paid by white people?” Dangarembga’s domestic reputation gives a salutary warning about the place of the writer in a world that is increasingly suspicious of democracy. There will be an even greater need for honest and instructive literature depicting the costs people pay under autocracy. But it turns out to be difficult to advocate for your countrymen when your country has been ruined. They have, after all, contributed to that ruination. Koschke, Dangarembga’s husband, remembered people telling him that “Tsitsi did Tambu dirty” by portraying her as a realistic and thwarted adult in “This Mournable Body”. Zimbabweans flinched at looking at their shame in the face and seeing it represented to the rest of the world. A well-known writer who didn’t want to be named told me dismissively: “We have to read Tsitsi because you guys in the West have paraded her work as excellent.” It’s not that Zimbabweans don’t like to read. “We have so many readers in Zimbabwe,” Prosper Zorwa, one of Harare’s top booksellers, told me. But his bestsellers are fantasy and sci-fi books with powerful, self-actualising narrators. Zorwa couldn’t remember selling a copy of “This Mournable Body”. Does it matter,” I asked Dangarembga, “if Zimbabweans don’t read your books?” She sighed. “You know, it used to. But I would be very sad if that was still important to me.” Yet the claim was belied by the way her voice rose in derision as she spoke of the books Zimbabweans do like. “They demand the author restore their pride,” she said. The sci-fi and fantasy craze reflected, crassly in her view, a demand for a “note of hope”, even if reality offered little. We were sitting together on a balcony – though not the one off her writing studio. This one looked over a pretty street hung with bougainvillaea near the much richer and whiter city of Cape Town in South Africa. Six months after Dangarembga’s arrest, the Zimbabwean government returned her passport pending a trial, and at the beginning of 2021 she quietly left Harare to take up a fellowship at the University of Stellenbosch. She seemed so charmed by the ease of the university town, with its white-gabled Dutch colonial houses and well-tended cobble-stone streets. “I could see myself not going home,” she confessed. She needed the space and funds the fellowship provided, and was grateful for the attention she now received. The nomination of “This Mournable Body” for the Booker had yielded “respectable recognition”, she said proudly – by which she meant Western recognition – and opened doors. “I have an agent for the first time. I have more translations.” During the fellowship, she worked on a dystopian young-adult novel “set under an oppressive government that plucky young people have to engage with the help of their ancestors”. I asked her why she was exploring a genre she had harshly criticised. She said she was enjoying writing for imaginary youngsters instead of real Zimbabweans. Dangarembga’s commitment to staying in Zimbabwe was on the verge of breaking. She’d encouraged her eldest daughter to leave for university. “I want her to go to Harvard. Sometimes I ask myself, ‘How much easier would things be for me if I had stayed at Cambridge?’” That surprised me in light of the unhappiness she’d felt in Britain and the sacrifices she’d made to stay in Zimbabwe for the sake of her art. But the mortification of living in Zimbabwe over recent decades had changed her. “The therapeutic qualities of disaster are very overrated,” she said drily. At that moment, it seemed to me that her roadside protests were not merely an effort to provoke political change. They were also a gruelling attempt to reanimate the enthusiasm of her youth, when she tore from the university to downtown, suffused with hope for her country. Perhaps, too, she needed to convince herself that she was different from the Zimbabweans she condemned as passive. But her younger feelings were impossible to recapture because a community of optimistic Zimbabweans no longer exists. Dangarembga had always wanted to stand out. Now she knows how alienating that can be. In late September a Zimbabwean judge finally convicted Dangarembga of her incitement charge, handing her a six-month suspended jail sentence and a $120 fine. By then, she had followed her daughter to Harvard for a fellowship. “As a nation, we Zimbabweans are spiritual babies,” she told me sadly when I saw her recently outside Boston. But I remembered the most heartfelt story she had told me. It was about the day of her arrest two years ago, one of the few times in recent years that she had the chance to talk to the people she called “ordinary Zimbabweans”. In the police van, she had struck up a conversation with the officers. “We started talking about many things: states of mind, what they called being ‘black’ and being ‘white’, and whether I was now ‘white’ because of the way I do things”, such as publishing overseas and criticising the government. “I think they were pleasantly surprised I was not aggressive or defensive with them. I told them, ‘Look, I want you to police anywhere with pride! But even your conditions are awful. I feel awful for you. I want you to have a good life.’” She was moved by the officers’ unexpected friendliness. Some of them, she told me, proudly even said they had read “Nervous Conditions”. ■ Eve Fairbanks is the author of “The Inheritors: An Intimate Portrait of South Africa’s Racial Reckoning” Photographs: Zinyange Auntony