IN ECONOMICS AS in pole-vaulting, a soft landing is preferable to a hard one. Most recently America’s finance wonks have been using the term to refer to a slow easing of demand and price pressures, partly as a result of increases in interest rates. (A recession, in contrast, would constitute a hard landing.) Such is the desire of the Federal Reserve, which since March 2022 has raised its benchmark rate from between zero and 0.25% to between 4.25 and 4.5%. Yet the inflation rate stayed stubbornly high for much of last year. Recent data from America’s Bureau of Labour Statistics have fuelled optimism among those hoping to avoid a painful landing. They show that inflation is slowing. From November to December 2022, prices for all goods fell by 0.1%. Compared with December 2021, prices increased by 6.5%, the smallest 12-month rise since October 2021. Removing the volatile cost of food and energy from the index, prices increased by 5.7% over the past year. The three-month “core” inflation rate was 3.1% when annualised, still too high for the Fed but clearly moving in the right direction (in mid-2022 annualised core inflation was nearly 8%). Another marker is a stable unemployment rate. On this measure, there was more good news. America’s unemployment rate fell from 3.6% in November to 3.5% in December— when extended out by several decimal points, it was the lowest reading since 1969. This figure is slightly skewed by a decline in the total number of willing workers since the onset of the covid-19 pandemic. Labour-force participation is still lower than it was in January 2020, for instance. But low unemployment shows that the Fed has not mucked up the job market yet, despite the sharp rise in interest rates (see chart). There is time still for the American economy to hit a bump. For one, monetary policy operates with a lag, so the downside pressure from higher interest rates is just starting to make itself felt. The continued resilience of the labour market is a risk itself: the Fed is now most concerned about whether rising wages will feed into stubbornly high underlying inflationary pressure, thereby necessitating yet more rate increases. The American economy has almost achieved its soft landing, but a monetary policy that is too aggressive may yet vault it into recession. ■