SHORTLY BEFORE the start of the American school year in September 2022 a grim meme began to circulate. Teenagers posted pictures of nooses on social media, calling them “back-to-school necklaces”. For some children, however, such thoughts were no joke—as a new working paper indicates. Suicide is the second most common cause of death for American children aged between 12 and 18. Benjamin Hansen of the University of Oregon, Joseph Sabia of San Diego State University and Jessamyn Schaller of Claremont McKenna College studied the relationship between suicides and school schedules during the covid-19 lockdowns of 2020. They found that suicide rates among children aged 12 to 18 fell substantially during school closures. Alas, they increased to 12-18% above pre-pandemic levels after schools reopened. Previous research by Mr Hansen found that suicides among teenagers decrease on average by about 21% over the summer—and in December—when schools take a break. But researchers could not determine whether teenage suicides were related to the school calendar, or were simply seasonal. The pandemic disrupted in-person lessons, providing the researchers with a natural experiment to compare suicide rates among schools that reopened at different times. Mr Hansen and his colleagues used historical data from the Centres for Disease Control (CDC), a government agency, and compared the number of suicides among teenagers between 1990 and 2019 with the number in 2020. During the lockdowns of 2020—when lessons took place online—the rate plunged. It was the first time suicides had declined during spring (rather than summer) in four decades. The data suggest that some suicides may have been delayed rather than averted: when school returned in the autum, numbers climbed higher than in previous years. Using footfall statistics from SafeGraph, a data provider, the authors found that suicides increased among children whose schools reopened in August, while the rise came later for those who went back in September. Schools that were shut entirely throughout lockdowns, and fully reopened after, experienced the biggest rise in suicides. The number dropped when term ended. The authors’ findings are corroborated by the fact that suicides among 19- to 25-year-olds were largely unchanged over the same period. The paper concludes that in-person bullying is the likeliest explanation for the rise in suicides when schools reopened. According to the CDC, teenagers who are bullied are up to 320% likelier to commit suicide. The researchers also found that Google queries for parental advice on bullying—which are also seasonal—dropped during lockdowns but spiked when school resumed. Lockdowns may have given students a break from classroom bullies, as well as more support from parents who were also stuck at home. ■