When Martine Caeymaex, then a curator at the Centre for Fine Arts in Brussels, asked David Hockney what he wished to visit during his trip to Brussels in 1992, his fax was curt: “STOCLET”. Of the many attractions and monuments in the Belgian capital, the English painter had chosen the least accessible. Protected by the state since 1976, the 20th-century Stoclet Palace is a marvel of the Art Nouveau movement. Curiously, however, the public has never been allowed inside. Mr Hockney was one of the lucky few to be granted entry. Architecture buffs who cross the traffic-choked Avenue de Tervueren and peer past the “private property” sign will see what persuaded UNESCO to declare the building a world-heritage site in 2009. A quartet of nude statues, frozen in copper by Franz Metzner, a German sculptor, crown a lofty tower. Below them a sculpture of Athena by Michael Powolny, an Austrian artist, perches atop the entrance. Jauntily-shaped bushes flank a white marble façade which would once have gleamed. In an effort to highlight the more than 1,000 Art Nouveau buildings in Brussels, this year the city is throwing open the doors to various grand houses and museums built in the style. But Stoclet Palace, despite being an architectural masterpiece, is unlikely to form part of this showcase. Adolphe Stoclet, a Belgian banker and art collector, and his wife, Suzanne, commissioned Josef Hoffmann, a prominent Austrian architect and one of the founders of the Vienna Secession movement, Austria’s version of Art Nouveau, to construct their future home in 1905. Completed in 1911, the building’s geometric design and clean lines marked a radical departure from the fluid, ornamental decoration that had dominated Art Nouveau architecture until then. This new look influenced the Art Deco and early Modernist styles that followed. Hoffmann recruited his peers to decorate the palace’s interior in harmony with the exterior. Gustav Klimt and Koloman Moser painted frescoes and designed frilly lampshades. The eclectic collection included cutlery, fancy furniture and even a dress for madame, all designed by the collective Hoffmann co-founded, Wiener Werkstätte (Vienna Workshop). “Everything was made in a very conscious way,” explains Adrián Prieto of the Royal Museums of Art and History in Brussels. As a result, Stoclet Palace is one of the best surviving examples of Gesamtkunstwerk (total work of art). Around 2005 three of the Stoclets’ four grand-daughters considered selling almost 300 of the objects they had inherited, an act which would have broken up the Gesamtkunstwerk. To protect it, the Brussels authorities decided to list the palace’s unique decorations as part of the landmark. The Stoclet sisters challenged the move in court in 2006 and lost. In 2013 Belgium’s top court upheld the ruling that the spoons and other items were inextricable from the house, thereby stopping the sale and preventing future ones. Under Belgium’s tangle of cultural heritage laws, Brussels should not have been able to make the initial designation, argues Marie-Sophie de Clippele, a legal expert in the field. The courts validated a wide interpretation of what constitutes an “immovable” monument of cultural heritage, she notes. Moreover, although the palace’s protected status restricts the owners’ ability to sell any part of it, the courts did not consider that the Stoclet sisters’ property rights had been violated, and no compensation was granted. The legal tussle with the regional government over these ornaments may explain why negotiations about opening the palace have so far been unsuccessful: the Stoclets’ descendants may feel that they have been unfairly treated. The family never publicly disclosed why they wanted to sell the family silver and The Economist was unable to reach them for comment. Nonetheless, money is needed to maintain the building. Since 2014 some 366,000 euros ($390,000) of public funds have been spent on conserving it, according to Pascal Smet, Brussels’s secretary of state for urbanism and heritage. He has long been in discussions with the family and their representatives about allowing visitors. In 2009 one of the Stoclets’ grand-daughters said she hoped the palace would again host cultural events in future. Still, the gates have remained closed during several Heritage Days. No virtual tours have materialised; nor does the UNESCO designation require the site to be publicly accessible. Not even an upcoming exhibition dedicated to Hoffmann, to open in Brussels in October, has spurred any change. Other buildings in Europe act as a blueprint for how the palace might let the world in. To secure a tour of the Maison de Verre, a private residence with a glass-block façade in Paris, hopefuls must write a letter of interest months in advance, stating the motivation for their visit. Likewise visitors need not overrun the monument in Brussels, which Mr Smet has described as “fragile”. Mr Prieto is in favour of limited viewings and prioritising research. The palace was never meant to be a museum, he adds, as it was a functional family house. Ms Caeymaex and a group of Belgian intellectuals suggest redirecting the traffic outside the heritage site and renaming the square after the family. As these debates grind on, Hoffmann’s pièce de résistance remains exactly that: resistant to visitors. ■