FEW ACHIEVEMENTS in comedy are as impressive as the catalogue of Tom Lehrer. Although it amounts to only 37 songs, each one is brilliant and timelessly funny. (It is easy to verify this by streaming his work on Spotify.) In 2020 Mr Lehrer placed his songwriting copyrights in the public domain, so that anyone would be free to perform, record or interpret his work as they pleased. A few weeks ago, he followed this up by relinquishing all rights to his recordings. They are available to download without charge from tomlehrersongs.com. At a time when the song rights of celebrated musicians such as Bob Dylan and Bruce Springsteen sell for hundreds of millions of dollars, few songwriters are likely to follow Mr Lehrer’s lead. The move is, however, entirely in character for Mr Lehrer, who has spent no more than 20 of his 94 years working in show business. (He twice abandoned stardom for academia.) This goes some way towards explaining why he is as obscure today as Mr Dylan is famous, yet his impact on his chosen form is every bit as profound. If anyone has a claim to have been present for the birth of modern satirical comedy, it is Mr Lehrer. Among its other virtues, his work captures Americans’ changing tastes in the 20th century. Mr Lehrer was a 24-year-old graduate student when he recorded his first album in 1953. He had been writing parodies of the popular song types of the day to amuse his friends: artful spoofs of the college football fighting song and the folk ballad, or ghoulish jokes about necrophagia. There was nothing especially novel in this. At Yale, Cole Porter was a member of The Whiffenpoofs, a tongue-in-cheek barbershop group whose signature song Mr Lehrer, as a Harvard man, took pleasure in lampooning in turn. Yet Mr Lehrer’s songs stood out for their incision and their astute social observations. He combined immaculately turned lines with his own adroit piano playing, thereby balancing economy of sound (and of budget) with an abundance of wit and skill. A distinct new comic sensibility was on the rise in America in the early 1950s: a kind of erudite, quick-fire, madcap insolence cloaked in dumb-guy shtick that endures to this day. (Mad magazine made a great success of it, as did Steve Allen, a television host, and the comedian Stan Freberg.) Mr Lehrer shared it, but his humour had a mordant and often macabre tone. This, combined with his scientific interests—he delighted in devising hilariously inventive songs about plagiarism among mathematicians (“Lobachevsky”), or the periodic table (“The Elements”)—made him unpalatable to the mainstream entertainment business. Instead, he pre-empted the DIY spirit of the independent label boom by decades. He paid $15 to record a ten-inch LP and sold it on campus and by mail order before setting up his own record company. As well as genre parodies, he produced mock-sentimental ditties. “The Wild West is Where I Want to Be” poked fun at the nuclear-weapons programme; Mr Lehrer had worked as a researcher at Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory and for the National Security Agency. In “I Wanna Go Back to Dixie”, he sang: “I wanna talk with Southern gentlemen/And put my white sheet on again/I ain’t seen one good lynchin’ in years.” This was caustic, audacious stuff in an era of Jim Crow and segregation. Like Elvis Presley soon after him, Mr Lehrer found his music career curtailed in 1955 when he was drafted into the army. Unlike Presley, he emerged sharper and stronger—and into an environment that better suited him, as musical comedy was in fashion. He went on tour and made two definitive live recordings of his repertoire, “An Evening Wasted with Tom Lehrer” (1959) and “Revisited” (1960). In the meantime he had become a cult figure in Britain, where his fans included Princess Margaret and many of the key names of the forthcoming satire boom—despite, or perhaps assisted by, most of his songs being banned by the BBC. After his first retirement in 1960, to pursue the Harvard doctorate he would never attain, he was lured back to songwriting for the American version of the topical British comedy show “That Was The Week That Was”. At his own insistence, others performed these songs on air, but in 1965 he recorded them himself on “That Was The Year That Was”, a masterpiece that wields a razor with the surest of touches. Like most great satirists, Mr Lehrer, who came from a secular Jewish family in Manhattan and leans politically to the left, showed no more respect for the pieties of his own side than for anyone else’s. “Join in the folk song army!” he sang on a track of the same name. “Guitars are the weapons we bring/To the fight against poverty, war and injustice./Ready, aim, sing!” Barring rare reappearances, Mr Lehrer has been out of the comedy business since the early 1970s. His reputation has outlasted his career. In 1980 Cameron Mackintosh, a theatre producer, staged a West End revue of Mr Lehrer’s work; 36 years later, Adam Kay, a British comedy writer, staged another, “The Remains Of Tom Lehrer”, and described him as “the greatest musical comedian of all time”. Bruce Dessau, founder of Beyond The Joke, a leading comedy website in Britain, says Mr Lehrer’s influence is profound and enduring, yet he does not carry “anywhere near as much cachet as he should”. He says performers including Fascinating Aïda, Victoria Wood and Tim Minchin nod to his work; Bo Burnham is another musical satirist in Mr Lehrer’s image. (Indeed they have both released songs called “New Math”.) “Whenever I see a young musical comedian who is good with words,” Mr Dessau says, “I tend to say they owe a debt to Tom Lehrer—whether they know it or not.” Mr Lehrer would no doubt disagree. “Help yourselves,” he has written in a statement on his website. “And don’t send me any money.” ■