GARETH BALE was a startlingly successful footballer. During nine years at Real Madrid the Welshman won the Champions League, Europe’s premier club competition, five times. He even scored in two finals, once with a breathtaking bicycle kick. For Wales he struck 41 goals in 111 games, a men’s national record, leading his country to the semi-finals of Euro 2016 and to its first World Cup in more than 60 years in Qatar last year. But although Mr Bale, who retired from the game this month, is beloved by his countrymen, he is less popular among Real’s fans. After successive injuries and lapses in form, the local media cast him as a lazy loner happy to sit on the substitutes’ bench and collect his salary (reportedly €670,000, or $760,000, per week from 2016 to 2022) without much effort. Mr Bale, who also played for Southampton, Tottenham Hotspur and Los Angeles FC, claimed to love the game. His commitment to the Welsh national team, at least, was unquestionable. Yet the player was unafraid to wind up his detractors. While celebrating Wales’s qualification for Euro 2020 in 2019, he was pictured clutching a Welsh flag emblazoned with the words “Wales. Golf. Madrid. In that order”. Mr Bale called the flag “a good bit of fun”. But his critics weren’t amused. The stunt added fuel to the rumours that he favoured working on his handicap to talking tactics with his team-mates. But suppose he didn’t adore football. It’s not so unusual. Professional sport is full of athletes who approach their work in only transactional terms. Benoît Assou-Ekotto, another former Tottenham player, famously—infamously, to purists—called football a “job” and “not my passion”. He listed hip-hop music among his real interests. Ben White, an England international, admitted he had little desire to follow football when off the clock. Others have been less subtle. Anthony Rendon, an American baseball player, called his sport “too long and boring” to watch. He still stayed awake to win a World Series. Such indifference is arguably healthy; there is more to life than ball games. Still, some athletes express true contempt. Take Andre Agassi, an American tennis great with eight grand-slam titles. In his autobiography (ghostwritten by J.R. Moehringer, the man behind Prince Harry’s recent memoir, “Spare”) Mr Agassi admitted that he hated tennis with a “dark and secret passion”. He cited the mental and physical toll of the game. Another example is Ronnie O’Sullivan, a snooker player with seven world championships to his name—and for some, the best there’s ever been. He regularly pillories his job, claiming it isn’t worth the “stress and hassle”.  Some say Mr O’Sullivan’s antics bring snooker into disrepute. Really? They are a marketer’s dream, and he probably knows it. But the image of the maverick player often goads people. Many find it intrinsically irritating that someone who has what most fans can only dream of—fame and fortune—might show dislike towards the very source of their privilege. Hold the outrage. Bored, unhappy or disdainful sportspeople are often the product of the pressures put upon them to perform, usually from an early age. In 2015 Nick Kyrgios, an Australian tennis player, said he preferred basketball but pursued tennis at the behest of his parents. Perhaps it’s no wonder he’s thrown so many tantrums since. Naomi Osaka, a Japanese grand-slam winner, took a break from tennis because of the damage the spotlight was doing to her mental health. Elena Delle Donne, an American basketball star, took time out before going professional because of the strain that her rise to the top was placing on her family life. Fans and pundits play a role in creating the world in which sports stars live. They should not be too vexed when pros acknowledge the cons, especially if they are still achieving results. Mr Bale’s last season in Madrid provides a cautionary tale about what can happen when the anger goes too far. After he missed Real’s match against their archrivals Barcelona in March 2022, Marca, a Spanish sports paper, labelled him a “parasite”. The Welshman branded the attack “disgusting”. Quite right, too. Replay his goals, count his medals—and then tell him what he has to prove.■