The Written World and the Unwritten World. By Italo Calvino. Mariner Books Classics; 384 pages; $17.99. Penguin Modern Classics; 369 pages; £10.99 THE APPROACHING centenary of a literary genius such as Italo Calvino (born on October 15th 1923) prompts many reflections: on the change in literary tastes and standards since the writer’s heyday as well as the brevity of human existence. Around conference tables in publishing houses, a question that might often be pondered is how to turn an anniversary into revenue. The answer of Mariner Books and Penguin, in Calvino’s case, has been to dig out a selection of his non-fiction writings—first published by Mondadori, an Italian company, back in 2002—and get them translated into English by the estimable Ann Goldstein. The resulting product is an assortment of essays, reviews and even written answers to interviewers’ questions. But it is uneven, and hardly comparable with James Joyce’s “Ulysses”, George Orwell’s “Animal Farm” or any of the other titles usually published in the guise of “modern classics”, as this volume is. The identity of the editor is not revealed, but whoever was responsible seems to have applied to the task the skills that go into compiling a successful album: make sure the first track is a winner and you can get away with putting in a few of the less catchy tunes afterwards. “The Written World and the Unwritten World” opens with an engagingly whimsical rumination on holiday reading. What follows is a long section on writing and translating that will doubtless be of interest to students and scholars of mid-20th-century Italian literature, yet of less appeal to those who merely enjoy reading Calvino. This is where the anthology shows its age. Among the questions tackled in Calvino’s occasionally quite leaden non-fictional prose is how he, as a disillusioned communist, should confront the issues raised by Marxist realism. That may have been of keen relevance back in 1957 and still of some interest in 2002, when Mondadori released their edition: Silvio Berlusconi had just won an election by, among other things, railing against largely phantomatic comunisti. But today? Still, there are gems to be mined. And, like real precious stones, they are found in unlikely places. Calvino, in contrast with most of today’s writers—at least those in the English-speaking world—had an education that embraced not only the humanities, but also the sciences. Several of his university years were spent in the faculties of agronomy at the universities of Turin and Florence. He went on to acquire a truly astounding familiarity with subjects as diverse as cosmology and structural anthropology. Paradoxically, his writings on these and other areas turn out to be altogether more stimulating and more entertaining than his navel-gazing about literature. The great Italian fabulist possessed a wry sense of humour; a reader might even suspect the author is having a laugh at his or her expense. Reviewing “Cannibals and Kings”, a study of 1977 by Marvin Harris, an anthropologist, Calvino is in his element. On the Aztecs’ enthusiasm for human sacrifice, he admits earnestly to “an impression of waste that no spiritual implication and no cultural functionality could balance”. But he adds, deadpan: “knowing, first, that the body of the victim, once the heart had been given to the gods, was not a leftover to throw away but was used and appreciated and, second, that meals of human flesh were an important contribution to the need for calories, allows me to better evaluate the advantages of an operation of which I saw mainly the costs.” Calvino has been variously celebrated as the European cousin of the magical realists and as a herald of post-modernism. But, as an American scholar once noted, he gave to art, including literature, a broader mission than the post-modernists: an exploratory role. In his own journey as a writer, he progressed from post-war neorealism to the fantastical narratives of his “Our Ancestors” trilogy, written in the 1950s, to the experimental literature of his later period, which yielded perhaps his most famous work, “If on a Winter’s Night a Traveller”. Where his exploration would have taken him next will never be known. Calvino died in 1985 at the age of just 61. ■