Read more of our recent coverage of the Ukraine crisis. EACH PHASE of the war in Ukraine has brought its iconic weapons. In the battle for Kyiv last winter the shoulder-fired Javelin anti-tank and Stinger air-defence missiles had the starring roles. When fighting shifted to the eastern Donbas region in the spring, it was the turn of the 155mm howitzer. When Ukraine went on the counter-offensive in the autumn the plaudits went to the HIMARS rocket launcher. Now, as both sides prepare for new offensives with the approach of spring, the spotlight has turned to armour—above all tanks and lighter infantry fighting vehicles. After nearly a year of fighting, despite spectacular Ukrainian successes in halting and then pushing back an ostensibly superior enemy, Russia still occupies about 17% of Ukraine’s territory, including Crimea, the peninsula it annexed in 2014, which poses some of the most difficult questions about the future of the war. Right now, the conflict has become one of grinding, bloody attrition. In the air, volleys of Russian missiles and drones seek to cripple Ukraine’s electrical grid. On the ground, artillery battles and human-wave attacks have allowed Russian forces to inch forward around the town of Bakhmut in the eastern region of the Donbas. The spring fighting season may prove decisive. Ukraine’s advantage in battlefield manpower is eroding now that the Kremlin has mobilised 200,000-300,000 soldiers, and may soon order another large call-up. With Russian military factories working triple shifts, the West’s depleting stocks of ammunition are unlikely to give Ukraine a decisive edge in artillery firepower. There is thus a growing sense in the West that Ukraine needs a game-changing strategy to achieve a victory large enough to force Russia to withdraw, or at least to negotiate. That, in turn, explains the ambition of America’s two unusually large military-aid packages this month, which mark a shift from providing weapons in piecemeal fashion to training and equipping entire fighting units. The United States announced the dispatch of more than 100 tracked Bradley fighting vehicles, 90 wheeled Stryker vehicles, 100 M113 armoured personnel-carriers and much more. They add up to arming two brigades’-worth of mechanised infantry. Add in the scores of fighting vehicles from elsewhere—German Marders, French AMX-10RCs and Swedish CV90s—and the Ukrainians have the makings of another brigade or two, perhaps making up overall a division’s-worth of Western equipment. Self-propelled howitzers are an important part of armoured units, providing supporting fire on the move. America will supply 18 such guns; Denmark donated its entire stock of 19 French-made CAESAR guns. To make a cohesive whole, America is training Ukrainian forces, a battalion at a time (usually three or four battalions make up a brigade), in combined-arms operations. This involves co-ordinating armour, infantry, engineers and drones to reinforce the strengths of each and mitigate their respective weaknesses. General Mark Milley, the chairman of America’s joint chiefs of staff, says the aid “will significantly increase Ukraine’s ability to defend itself from further Russian attacks and to go on the tactical and operational offensive to liberate the occupied areas”. Conspicuously absent, though, are large numbers of Western main battle tanks that would maximise the power of such an armoured fist. Britain has promised 14 Challenger tanks. That would equip only a company, not a battalion–let alone a brigade. A British armoured brigade has 56 Challengers, for instance; an American one fights with 87 M1 Abrams tanks. For the glaring gap, blame disagreements among Western allies, and particularly German angst. The German-made Leopard 2 tanks offer the best military option: the diesel-engined Leopards are plentiful (about 2,000 are in service across Europe) and easier to operate than the turbine-powered Abrams. Several countries are willing to supply Leopards, but to the outrage of many allies, Germany has so far declined to send the tanks, or even to give permission for others to send the Leopards it has sold them. At one point German officials said the dispatch of Leopards would be contingent on America’s sending the Abrams, a linkage the Pentagon rejects. The new German defence minister, Boris Pistorius, has sensibly backed away from playing “you first”. He said Germany needed more time to decide—perhaps just days. In the meantime, he said allies could begin training the Ukrainians on Leopards. Exasperated by “global indecision”, Mikhailo Podolyak, an adviser to Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, tweeted: “Every day of delay is the death of Ukrainians. Think faster.” Lindsey Graham, a prominent Republican Senator, urged both America and Germany to send tanks, chiding them: “I am tired of the shit show […] Putin is trying to rewrite the map of Europe by force of arms. World order is at stake.” That said, tanks might not be as important as the political rows suggest. Ukraine has hundreds of Soviet-era tanks, from pre-war stocks, as well as refurbished ones given by eastern European countries and, not least, the many it has captured from Russia. Western tanks are better protected and more capable. In their absence, though, Ukraine could mix its Soviet-vintage heavy armour with Western infantry fighting vehicles to pack a substantial punch. Bradleys, for instance, performed well as tank-killers during the Iraq war of 1991. Jack Watling of the Royal United Services Institute, a British think-tank, argues that the latest pledges of weapons will create “the most powerful armoured force in the Ukrainian military; it gives them something that allows them to move quickly, take damage and conduct breakthrough operations.” A bigger disappointment than the absence of tanks is the lack of longer-range precision weapons to strike Russian command posts and logistics hubs deeper behind Russian lines, adds Ben Hodges, a retired general who used to command the American army in Europe. The GPS-guided missiles fired by HIMARS (and the related MLRS launcher) have a range of 70-84km. At first they caused mayhem in Russia’s rear areas, but it has since re-organised itself to keep targets out of range. The Pentagon refuses to supply the 300km-range ATACMS missile that can be fired from the same launchers, deeming it escalatory. America and Ukraine “agree to disagree” about ATACMS, says Colin Kahl, the Pentagon’s under-secretary for policy. Mr Kahl concedes that Ukraine needs the means to wage “the deep fight”. But the Pentagon is also withholding the Grey Eagle armed drone, with a range of hundreds if not thousands of kilometres. Western military jets are out of the question for now. Some had hoped that a new 150km-range weapon, known as the GLSDB missile, which can also be fired from HIMARS, would be announced in the latest arms-supply packages. It features the Small Diameter Bomb, a laser- or GPS-guided bomb dropped from aircraft and used extensively in Iraq and Afghanistan. It would be mounted onto obsolete unguided M26 rockets. With wings that unfold in mid-flight, the GLSDB manoeuvres by gliding towards its target, increasing the range and options for attack. With more and better armour, and the means of conducting deep missile strikes, says General Hodges, Ukraine would have the best chance of taking Crimea, which he deems the “decisive terrain”. He argues that, by concentrating its armour, Ukraine could make a thrust to the Sea of Azov and sever the land bridge between Russia proper and Crimea. Long-range-precision munitions, meanwhile, would allow it to destroy the actual bridge to Crimea over the Kerch strait, which was partly damaged by a still-unexplained explosion in October 2022. Ukraine could then pound the Russians at will, make their position in Crimea untenable and force them to give up the peninsula, he contends. Control of Crimea allows Russia to choke Ukrainian ports and supply its forces in southern Ukraine. Losing it would be a severe military and, perhaps more important, political blow to Vladimir Putin, Russia’s president, General Hodges notes. But that is also why some allies are queasy about Ukraine trying to retake it, fearing it might push Mr Putin to resort to nuclear weapons. Are the allies willing to take the risk? America asserts that “Crimea is Ukraine” and Ukraine has every right to reconquer it. Whether America would in practice be prepared to support a Ukrainian operation to take Crimea is another matter. Ever vague about the endgame, American officials concede that, at some point, American and Ukrainian war aims may diverge. But giving Ukraine at least the means to threaten Russia’s position in Crimea may have advantages. “If you want a negotiated settlement, then prioritising Crimea might well be sensible, not escalatory,” argues Mr Watling. Talk of retaking Crimea seems premature to some. “Look at the map of the current front lines in Ukraine. The Ukrainians would have to first achieve significant military success in the south before Crimea is up for discussion,” notes Michael Kofman of CNA, a think-tank. Like General Hodges, he agrees that the focus for Ukraine should be on precision weapons, equipping new units and manoeuvre warfare. Unlike him, though, he thinks further gains will be more difficult and costly for Ukraine to attain. Ukraine’s recapture of the port city of Kherson in November was an arduous affair even though it was fighting a semi-isolated Russian garrison with its back to the Dnieper river. Since their retreat, the Russians are now defending a shorter overall front line with more soldiers and reserves. What is more, “if the next Ukrainian offensive goes poorly, it carries the risk of a Russian counter-offensive and, in the worst-case scenario, losing territory rather than gaining it,” argues Mr Kofman. American combined-arms tactics have often relied on air superiority. “The missing ingredient for Ukraine is not that it doesn’t have Western tanks; it’s that it doesn’t have a Western air force,” notes Mr Kofman. “Combined-arms manoeuvre is much easier to effect when you also have the advantage of US airpower.” Gian Gentile of the RAND Corporation, a think-tank, recognises that, as a cavalry officer commanding Bradleys in Iraq, “I didn’t have to worry about anything flying above me”; now Russia and Ukraine both lack control of the air. He also acknowledges the risk to the Ukrainians of going on the offence. Clausewitz, a 19th-century Prussian general and strategist, argued that defence was the stronger form of war. But, Colonel Gentile says, “ultimately it’s the offensive that produces the decisive results. The attackers have the initiative: they know when, and where and how they want to strike.” As both sides prepare for the next round, there is a sense of foreboding. Even as he asserted that Ukraine could make progress, General Milley declared: “For this year it would be very, very difficult to militarily eject the Russian forces from every inch of Russian-occupied Ukraine.” The conflict would have to end at the negotiating table at some point, he said, adding: “This is going to be a very, very bloody war.” Nervousness is palpable in the Kremlin, too. Air-defence weapons have recently appeared on rooftops in Moscow. And Dmitry Medvedev, who serves as deputy chairman of Russia’s security council, warned in a post on Telegram, a messaging app: “The defeat of a nuclear power in a conventional war may trigger a nuclear war.” His nuclear bombast was nothing new. Yet his acknowledgment that Russia could be defeated amounted to a novel and striking admission of weakness.■