To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. THE WORLD’S population pecking order is about to change. In April, India is expected to overtake China as the most populous country. That milestone is a sign of trends that will have big economic and social consequences for both countries. Since 1950 India and China have provided 35% of the world’s population growth. But China’s strict family-planning rules—the so-called one-child policy introduced in 1980—drastically reduced its birth rate. Now its population is about to decline. Although the Communist Party allows women to have three children, they average only 1.2. By 2050 China’s population will be 8% smaller than it is now. India’s population, meanwhile, will continue growing. It is expected to peak at 1.7bn in 2064, when it will be nearly 50% larger than that of China (see chart). India is expected to provide more than a sixth of the increase of the world’s working-age population (15-64-year olds) between now and 2050. Its economy recently displaced Britain’s as the world’s fifth-biggest and will rank third by 2029, predicts State Bank of India. China’s self-inflicted demographic slump spells trouble for its economy. Most obviously, it means that China will have lots of non-working old people who will require support. China faces the “4-2-1 phenomenon”: each single child is responsible for two parents and four grandparents. Even with high savings rates, it seems unlikely that the younger generation will be able (or willing) to afford such a burden. So most elderly Chinese will rely heavily on a public pension system that itself is underfunded. The shift also threatens to end China’s role as the world’s factory. What once appeared to be an endless stream of cheap labour is starting to run dry. Despite pools of underemployment in the countryside, China already has shortages of manual workers. You might expect production to shift to labour-rich India. That is especially so as relations between China and the West become more hostile. But companies, especially in more advanced industries, tend to set up production in places where there are already suppliers and skilled workers. That is where India has a problem. India’s development has relied less on industry than that of other emerging economies. Manufacturing generates 14% of Indian GDP, compared with 27% in China. What industry India does have clusters in the relatively prosperous south and west. But it is the poorer northern states that are making more babies (see map). Uttar Pradesh, for instance, is home to 17% of India’s population but has only 9% of its industrial jobs. That mismatch will hamper India’s economic growth. Internal migration would help. Road, rail and air connections are improving. The government is investing massively in digitisation, which should encourage people to move by helping them to hold on to their ID cards, welfare benefits and voting rights and to communicate with their families at home. Yet these efforts will take years, maybe decades, to pay dividends. Even as India’s population grows, it will struggle to capitalise on the potential of its young workforce. ■ Read more of our coverage on population changes: •The world’s population has reached 8bn. Don’t panic•Elderly populations mean more government spending•What to read to understand why population changes matter•India will become the world’s most populous country in 2023•The pecking order of the world’s population is soon to change