BEATRICE HERFORD took to the stage in London in 1895 to perform a series of her own comic monologues. The American actress played a host of characters using voice and gesture alone, “without any of the usual aids to a recital in the form of properties or scenery or costume”. The audience—which included George Bernard Shaw—was amazed by this “new society entertainer whose powers of mimicry were as original as they were amusing”, recalled one literary critic. One-woman shows have entertained and enthralled audiences ever since. The format is helpfully pliable, says Misri Dey of Falmouth University; performers in the 20th century borrowed aspects of other genres, including vaudeville, stand-up and performance art, to suit their tastes and skills. (The one-woman show is usually, but not always, written and performed by the same person.) In the 1980s Whoopi Goldberg made her name with “Moms”—in which she played Moms Mabley, a pioneering comedian—and “The Spook Show”. In the 1990s Anna Deavere Smith focused on true stories of social unrest in her “documentary theatre” shows. V (formerly Eve Ensler) wrote and performed “The Vagina Monologues”, which also turned testimony into drama. In the late 2000s and early 2010s, the one-woman show became increasingly mainstream. “Fleabag”, a darkly funny tale of a woman navigating grief, family and relationships, won plaudits at the Edinburgh Fringe in 2013 and was adapted into a hit BBC show. (Phoebe Waller-Bridge, the creator, brought the original production back to the stage in America and Britain.) “Chewing Gum Dreams”, a play of 2012 by Michaela Coel exploring adolescence, race and relationships, was also turned into a television series. Both Ms Waller-Bridge and Ms Coel have gone on to create further celebrated work on screen. Liz Kingsman is the latest writer-performer to achieve acclaim in this genre. “One Woman Show”, first staged in a 50-seat venue in London, has earned five-star reviews during its recent run in the West End; it transfers to Sydney Opera House, in Ms Kingsman’s home city, in February. Ms Kingsman has been in sketch-comedy groups—she grew up watching British shows such as “Big Train” and “Smack The Pony”—and also has a “lovely parallel life where [she] gets to go and be a French actress” as a star of “Parlement”, a comedy series set in Brussels. She will appear in the forthcoming TV show “Icon of French Cinema”. Her current solo project, therefore, was not really part of the plan: she found the prospect of being onstage alone daunting. But she noticed the proliferation of a trope in novels, films, television dramas and, especially, one-woman shows—that of the “20-something person whose life isn’t going the way she expected it to”. She saw parody potential. “One Woman Show” follows a ruthlessly ambitious actor seeking fame in a hurry, whose solution is to create her own drama. Ms Kingsman’s performance flits between her onstage alter-ego and the play-within-a-play—called “Wildfowl”—that the character creates. It sends up those character tropes (“you’re not a mess, you just want to be seen as one”) as well as the format as a whole: “There has to be a hard-hitting bit where the character bares their soul.” The show contemplates the link between art and autobiography: Ms Kingsman’s character is trying to satisfy audiences’ demand for onstage authenticity and vulnerability. Confessional writing is nothing new—it dates back to St Augustine in 397AD—but it is in vogue. The changing media landscape, starting in the 2000s with “Big Brother” and its confession room, as well as “Jeremy Kyle” and other salacious talk shows, has normalised the revelation of personal information, explains Stephen Greer of Glasgow University. Social media has further blurred the boundaries between public and private. Memoirs are a booming genre, as are personal essays. One-woman shows have thrived in this “self-narrativising” culture, says Ms Dey. Ms Kingsman describes herself as deeply private. People “should be allowed to be confessional” if they choose, but “it would be great if it wasn’t considered the only way to make something.” Her show points to another way. There is space, Ms Kingsman argues, for “characters and fiction and silly things and dumb humour”. The popularity of “One Woman Show” confirms that belief. Ms Kingsman admits there is something “deeply ironic” about it all: in parodying how the format can be cynically used as a path to fame, she has earned acclaim herself. She has been hailed by some critics as “the new queen of British comedy”. Onstage, she quips that she is mocking others “for putting on elaborate personal vehicles, when this is clearly an elaborate personal vehicle for myself”. If her peers’ success is anything to go by, a TV deal awaits. ■ “One Woman Show” finishes its run at the Ambassadors Theatre, London, on January 21st. It is playing at the Sydney Opera House between February 1st and February 19th