To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. SHORT OF A MIRACLE, no amount of new solar panels or wind turbines will be enough to avoid catastrophic levels of global warming. Climate models are unanimous: as well as slashing the amount of greenhouse gases they produce, humans will also have to suck vast quantities out of the atmosphere. But according to the first global assessment of carbon-dioxide removal, published on January 19th by a group of American, British and other European scientists, there is a huge gap between what is currently possible and what will be needed to keep the average temperature between 1.5°C and 2°C above pre-industrial levels—the goal set out in the Paris agreement (see chart). The researchers calculated that keeping temperature rises within that range would require scrubbing anything from 450bn to 1,100bn tonnes of CO2 from the air by 2100. The first is roughly ten times the amount humans emit annually; the second is almost half the amount they have ever produced. At the moment just 2bn tonnes are removed each year. Almost all of that is sequestered through conventional methods, such as planting or maintaining forests. These methods will not be enough. Under countries’ existing policies and promises such sinks would absorb about 2.6bn tonnes of carbon dioxide annually by 2030. That is between 48% and 74% of what the authors calculate will be needed to stay on the right track, depending on the rate that renewables are scaled up or demand for energy is reduced. Instead, the shortfall will have to be made up by novel technologies, which currently account for a tiny fraction of removals (about 2m tonnes, or 0.1% each year). These include direct air carbon capture and storage (DACCS), which pulls carbon from the air and seals it underground (or uses it to make long-lasting products, such as cement); and “biochar”, waste organic matter that is turned into charcoal and buried. None of this currently exists at scale, though attempts to get there are growing. The report found that the number of carbon-removal patents being filed has risen steadily over the past two decades, especially in China (see chart 2). In 2018, the latest year for which complete data are available, 129 patent applications were submitted worldwide; in 2000 there were just 19. Between 2010 and 2022 $4.1bn of public money was funnelled towards the research, development and demonstration of carbon-absorbing technologies, mainly in America. The authors of the report reckon that the industry will have to grow by four to six orders of magnitude by 2050 to have a chance of hitting temperature targets. Much greater funding is needed, as is a faster pace of innovation.■