To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. ANYONE LIVING in Europe would agree that the continent suffered through a cost-of-living crisis in 2022. Consumer prices rose by roughly 8% year over year. Energy prices surged by 29%. And yet, according to the latest Worldwide Cost of Living Survey, a twice-yearly tally of the world’s most expensive cities by EIU, our sister company, western Europe has generally become less expensive relative to its peers in the past year (see chart). Although Europe’s costliest cities, such as Zurich, Geneva and Paris, remained near the top of the ranking, the continent occupied just five of top 20 spots in 2022, compared with ten in 2021. Eastern European cities, excluding those in Russia, fell by an average of seven places. British ones dropped by 21 places on average. Of the ten cities that fell furthest in the rankings, European cities account for five. The survey, which compares the prices of more than 200 products and services in 172 cities, is designed to help companies estimate cost-of-living adjustments for expatriates. To help compare the cost of living in different currencies, all prices are converted into dollars. But the greenback has surged in value this year, owing to aggressive interest-rate increases by the Federal Reserve, market turmoil and fears of a recession. This has dragged down relative costs by 5.5% in euro-area countries and by 10.5% in Britain. Had currencies held steady in 2022, EIU reckons that the German cities included in its ranking would have climbed four places, on average. Instead, they dropped by 16. In fact, the only European cities that climbed EIU’s rankings this year, apart from tiny Reykjavík, were all in Russia. Although analysts issued gloomy forecasts for the rouble in the wake of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, when the country was pummelled by Western sanctions, by late April the currency had recovered all of its losses, owing to interest-rate rises, capital controls and high oil and gas prices. Consumer prices in Russia, meanwhile, have rocketed. According to EIU, in 2022 prices rose by 17% in Moscow and by 19% in St Petersburg. With both a stronger currency and high inflation, the two cities shot up EIU’s ranking of expensive cities by 88 and 70 places, respectively. European cities are among the priciest in the world for expats. This year, thanks largely to volatile foreign-exchange markets, they became slightly more budget-friendly. ■ Read more on the EIU’s cost of living index:•The world’s most, and least, expensive cities•These are the most expensive cities in North America