JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE seems to have known something of the conflicting desires that assail many football supporters. “Two souls, alas! reside within my breast,” says Faust, his erring hero, offering a parallel of sorts between fans’ wish for success on the pitch, even if bought, and their love of the purer, unmoneyed game. One city where fans are experiencing contrasting emotions is Berlin. There, the fortunes of the city’s first-division clubs, Hertha BSC and FC Union, show that money does not always buy sporting happiness—and that romanticism can be remarkably successful. Berlin is not Germany’s football capital and never has been. Its clubs won a few championships before the Nazis came to power. BFC Dynamo of East Berlin won several East German titles (though it is widely believed that it was at least partly abetted by the state, for political reasons). But the Tasmania Berlin side of 1965-66 still holds almost all records for the worst team in the history of the Bundesliga, Germany’s top league. And it has been more than 20 years since a Berlin team made it into the group stages of the Champions League, Europe’s most prestigious club tournament. Hertha BSC, nicknamed “die alte Dame” (“the old lady”), has long struggled to become a top club. It had a few decent runs around the turn of the century, but was regularly relegated. Increasingly desperate and financially constrained, the club turned to Lars Windhorst, a German businessman, in 2019. He paid more than €350m ($385m), a large sum by Bundesliga standards, for a sizeable stake. The club went on a short-live spending spree. But success on the pitch has remained elusive. Hertha managed—by a whisker—to avoid relegation last season and are currently third from bottom of the table. Mr Windhorst sold his stake in the club to an American private-equity firm in November, abandoning his project to make Hertha, in his words, a “big city club”. (No prizes for guessing which letter Hertha’s opponents mockingly replace with “sh”.) In Germany, where professional football clubs, with some exceptions, have to be majority-owned by their fans, it is hard for investors lacking a long-standing relationship with a club to take at least some control. Many try anyway, like Mr Windhorst at Hertha or Klaus-Michael Kühne, whose cash injections into Hamburger SV have yet to transform the fortunes of the former giant, which is spending a fifth consecutive season in Germany’s second division. When they buy stakes, investors become embroiled in the complex politics of large German football clubs, with their thousands of voting members, strong local ties and political factions. According to an investigation by a German law firm, prompted by reporting in the Financial Times, Mr Windhorst’s attempts to navigate club politics involved a private intelligence firm that orchestrated a campaign to oust the elected president of the club. (Mr Windhorst has denied involvement.) In Germany investors in football clubs have been successful mostly when taking the reins at small outfits like Hoffenheim (software billionaire Dietmar Hopp), Wolfsburg (Volkswagen, after supporting the club for decades) or Leipzig (Red Bull). But if clubs backed by investors have it tough, small clubs without money have it even tougher. Unless, that is, they are FC Union from east Berlin. The “Eisernen” (“iron-made”, a nod to the club’s working-class roots) have avoided the tangle of money and politics that has snared Hertha, and look all the better for it. They are currently the main rivals to Bayern Munich, Germany’s dominant club. With 14 matches left to play this season, Union sit in second place, one point behind the Bavarian behemoths in the Bundesliga table. This is no fluke. They finished an impressive fifth and seventh in the past two seasons, and qualified for the Europa League, Europe’s second-most-important club competition, just three years after being promoted to the Bundesliga for the first time in 2019. Union’s success on the pitch baffles many observers, but the fanatical fans who pack into the Bundesliga’s smallest stadium are certainly part of it. The ground holds just 22,000 spectators, more than 18,000 of whom must stand in old-school terraces (The Olympiastadion, where Hertha play, has a capacity of almost 75,000). The club likes to take players on loan from bigger clubs and tends to sign experienced players with something left to prove to join a defensively sound, disciplined, well-coached team. Its attempt during the January transfer window to land Isco, a 30-year-old Spanish star formerly of Real Madrid, would have fitted this pattern. But then so did the collapse of the deal. According to press reports, Union’s management refused to give in to last-minute demands for a bigger signing-on bonus. Union stick strictly to a budget. In the Bundesliga season of 2020-21, no other club spent less per point won. Hertha can no longer claim to be Berlin’s only major football club. Union is firmly at home in the Bundesliga, and on course to qualify for a European competition for the third year in a row—a feat usually reserved for the top clubs. They have just reached the quarter-finals of Germany’s league cup, too. Winning that would carry symbolic weight for the cross-town rivalry, since the final always takes place in Hertha’s home ground. And it would be cause for celebration for footballing romantics around the world.■