HOW MUCH really changes from one Super Bowl to the next? The teams, usually—though the Kansas City Chiefs will make their third appearance in four years on Sunday, following a five-year period in which the New England Patriots played four times. The half-time show’s entertainers—though the spectacle is guaranteed to be overproduced and over-long. Viewers know they will be treated to 60 minutes of American football stretched across four or five hours, a parade of clichés from excitable announcers and, if their team wins, a sore throat and perhaps a hangover. But one aspect of Sunday’s game in Glendale, Arizona, in which the Chiefs will play the Philadelphia Eagles, will be genuinely new. It will be the first Super Bowl held in a state in which betting on sport is legal. In recent years American football’s relationship with gambling has gone from remote (if flirtatious) to a near-full embrace. Now there is a National Football League (NFL) team in Las Vegas, bookies run television adverts during games and networks air gambling-related segments. And State Farm Stadium, site of the weekend’s showdown, was the first NFL stadium with a sportsbook—a place to lay bets—on its grounds. Until five years ago gambling on sport was illegal everywhere but Las Vegas, with a few modest exceptions such as parlay betting—the placing of a single bet on multiple games—in a few states. Sports leagues’ dim view of gambling dated back to at least the 1919 World Series, in which punters allegedly paid players from the Chicago White Sox to lose. Seven decades later Pete Rose, perhaps the greatest hitter in baseball history, was permanently banned from the game, and made ineligible for the Hall of Fame, for betting on the sport. Even as Las Vegas boomed, leagues remained averse to putting teams there because the city allowed sports betting. Until 20 years ago, the NFL even refused to allow television networks to broadcast ads during games encouraging people to visit Las Vegas. But bets were still placed outside Las Vegas. For decades newspapers published, and announcers made coy references to, point spreads, which formed the basis of innumerable office and bar-room pools. Finding a bookie in a big city was never that difficult. And the nature of American football means it has long drawn gambling action, of varying degrees of legality. It has high scores, a plethora of events suitable for a prop bet (a bet laid on a single event—which player scores first, what colour Gatorade is dumped on a winning coach—rather than a game’s outcome), many available statistics, and regular but not grinding frequency. The NFL embraced gambling in much the same way that a character in Ernest Hemingway’s “The Sun Also Rises” went bankrupt: gradually, then suddenly. Moralistic aversion was increasingly at odds with fans’ experience. The internet and, later, smartphones, meant that people no longer had to fly to Vegas or meet a bookie at a bar; they could just place bets online through overseas gambling sites. And they did: billions of dollars each year, much of it on American football. In 2018 the Supreme Court ruled, sensibly, that a federal law from 1992 that banned sports betting in most states was, as Justice Samuel Alito wrote, “a direct affront to state sovereignty” and therefore unconstitutional. Five years later sports betting, either in-person or online, is legal in most American states. The NFL has formal relationships with several gambling firms, as do some teams. Caesars, which owns and runs casinos in at least 16 states, bought the naming rights to the Superdome, home of the New Orleans Saints. A sizeable share of fans who attend matches in states where sports betting is legal gamble during the games using their phones. To British readers, accustomed to seeing Premier League footballers advertising gambling firms on their shirts, this may seem much ado about nothing. But for a league that once saw sports betting as a threat, it represents a near-total reversal. For all that, as in British football, players and other NFL employees still may not bet on the league’s games. Last year Calvin Ridley, a promising young player for the Atlanta Falcons, was suspended for at least a full season after he violated this policy. And bookies may not set up inside stadiums and take bets during games: State Farm Stadium’s sportsbook is a short walk from the field itself. For many fans betting has become an integral part of their fandom: a way to express support for their team, or to make matchdays more interesting. This is not obviously worse than the beer and unhealthy food that are an integral part of Super Bowl Sunday for many supporters. All such activities can be taken to extremes; often, they are not. And anybody can watch American football and not gamble, just as they can watch the Super Bowl over salad and sparkling water. But for those that like to bet, better to do it through regulated onshore firms than fly-by-night overseas operations. Place your bets and pass the wings.■