THE ECONOMIST’S Big Mac index is a lighthearted guide to whether currencies are at their “correct” level. It is a way to make exchange-rate theory more digestible. The index is based on purchasing-power parity (PPP): we take the real price of McDonald’s flagship burger around the world and compare it with what the price should be, based on the current exchange rate. In theory, PPP signals where exchange rates should be heading in the long run—moving towards the rate that would make the price in dollars of a Big Mac the same in various countries. So, when our index detects an obvious currency misalignment, how useful is it in actually predicting future moves in the exchange rate? If our Big Mac guide were fully in sync with future forex movements, a reading of 20 on the index would suggest that a currency is overvalued by 20% relative to the dollar, implicitly predicting it should decline by roughly 20% to be at fair value. In practice, the Big Mac index does not have such a perfect crystal ball (no doubt it has been smudged somewhat by grease from the side order of fries). Its predictive power in the short term is especially weak. But it has a decent record over a five-year horizon (see chart). Our chart shows how closely an index rating in every January since 2000 correlated with changes in real effective exchange rates one and five years later (real effective exchange rates refer to the nominal value of a currency against a weighted average of several others, controlled for inflation). Our analysis focuses on four major currencies other than the dollar: the euro, the yen, the yuan and the pound. Burger prices do not strongly relate to currency movements at the one-year mark. But the index does provide an informative signal about their real exchange rates in five years’ time. According to our burgernomics, a currency that is overvalued by 20% relative to the dollar will, on average, experience a 4% drop in its real exchange rate over the next five years. (Equally, a currency that is undervalued by 20% experiences a 4% average gain.) Some of that 4% decline stems from nominal currency depreciation, while some may also come from slightly higher inflation. To see what that could mean for future exchange rates, consider the current index readings. If a Big Mac costs $5.36 in America, by today’s exchange rate it should cost £4.34 in Britain. In fact, the meal costs £3.79, or $4.68. That suggests that the pound is undervalued against the dollar by about 13%. The pound tanked last year, after a short-lived prime minister unveiled her disastrous economic policy. These sudden shocks to exchange rates are smoothed out in the index over time, however, so our long-term modelling can gauge where the rate is heading. Our model suggests that the pound ought to rise by about 3% by 2028 against a basket of currencies. Of the three other currencies we analysed, China’s and Japan’s should also rise over the next five years, by an estimated 7% and 9%, respectively. The euro, the only currency of the four that was overvalued, is forecast to decline by 1.4% over the same period. Because of the many factors that affect currency prices, however, our model does have a rather large margin of error; our five-year forecast for the change in the exchange rate of one Japanese Yen ranges from -12% to 30%. Big Mac predictions should be taken with a pinch of salt.■