To capture soundbites from ordinary people going about their lives, news teams and documentary film-makers usually head to city squares and transport hubs. Pawel Lozinski, a Polish director, takes a different approach. Instead of seeking out his subjects, they come to him. From the balcony of his first-floor apartment in Warsaw, he chats to passersby as his camera rolls. (He reports having almost 2,000 conversations over the course of two and a half years). He poses simple questions: where are you going, what’s that you’re carrying? Each is an invitation to his interlocutors to share their stories. The result is “The Balcony Movie” (pictured, above), a series of penetrating glimpses into the lives of regular Poles, told in their own words. Some are rushing to work. Others move at a slower pace, lingering long enough to reveal their secrets. A middle-aged woman quietly admits that she is happier since her husband passed away. A man mourns the loss of his partner and the end of a once-clandestine relationship. The film is a study in human connection, which translates across cultures. After being screened at international film festivals in 2021 and 2022, the documentary became available to stream on Mubi and HBO Max. The Museum of the Moving Image in New York recently organised a retrospective of Mr Lozinski’s work around the film. “The Balcony Movie” follows a style of documentary reportage that is celebrated in Poland. “We believe in the world in a drop of water,” Mr Lozinski explains. The idea, often attributed to Kazimierz Karabasz—the godfather of Polish documentary—is that a film can be deceptively simple, yet full of meaning. Krzysztof Kieslowski, the acclaimed director of the “Three Colours” trilogy, adopted a similar approach in “Talking Heads”, his short film of 1980. He asked 79 Poles of all ages about their lives; a stripped-back format that yielded rich responses. “The Balcony Movie” draws on this concept. It rebuffs the notion that great documentaries need to be tied to famous personalities or overtly political causes. Mr Lozinski’s interviewees are a microcosm of Warsaw and, to a certain extent, Polish society at large. A beaming young woman explains why she carefully crafts her image on social media; an ex-convict pops by a few times—he seems to enjoy the company. Gay men and women are among the dozens who pause beneath Mr Lozinski’s perch. Their presence on screen is pertinent. Poland’s conservative-nationalist government has eroded the rights of LGBT people, a group it sees as a threat to traditional values. Mr Lozinski (pictured, below) made sure he was free to depict whomever he pleased in his film by partnering with a private production company. His documentary also gestures at Polish resilience. The country struggled under a communist regime for more than four decades after the second world war. A woman in a wheelchair who looks old enough to have lived through the war humbly maintains that nothing special happened in her life. The tireless Ms Zosia, who cleans the grounds outside the apartment, hints at the daily routines which keep people going in times of instability. The fallout from the end of communism in 1989 kickstarted Mr Lozinski’s career. His debut feature, “Birthplace” (1992), follows Henryk Grynberg, a Jewish writer and survivor of the Holocaust, who is returning to a Polish village to search for his father’s body. He confronts the neighbours he believes knew about his father’s killing, which took place during the war. Such complicity was not a subject Mr Lozinski could have broached earlier. The communists did not acknowledge cases of Poles committing atrocities against their Jewish compatriots. In their telling, only the Germans were to blame, Mr Lozinski explains. (This is a policy that the current government has continued to pursue: it is an offence to reference Polish collusion with Nazi crimes). Coming to terms with his country’s past was also a way of understanding his own. “I’m a Polish Jew, so it was my story,” he says. Since then, he has not shied away from depicting the most difficult parts of people’s lives. “Chemo” (2009) chronicles patients in an oncology unit; “You Have No Idea How Much I Love You” (2016) probes the rocky relationship between a woman and her daughter through the lens of psychotherapy. “Father and Son” (2013) is a self-portrait shot during a road trip that explores Mr Lozinski’s relationship with his dad, Marcel, who is also an influential documentary film-maker. “The Balcony Movie” is full of bittersweet moments, but it is also uplifting. As Mr Lozinski points out, the aim was to make “a tribute to life”. ■