AT THE BEGINNING of March 1898 a Belgian research vessel became stuck in the ice of Antarctica’s Bellingshausen Sea. The Belgica and its crew—which included Roald Amundsen, who later became the first man to reach the South Pole—remained there for a year. Scientists aboard Polarstern, a German research ship currently in the same place, now have a very different view: earlier this week the expedition leader said he had never seen the sea so devoid of ice. On February 13th sea ice across the Antarctic as a whole spanned 1.91m square kilometres, the lowest level recorded since satellite records began in 1979. The world is now, on average, 1.0-1.3°C hotter than it was before the Industrial Revolution. But that change has not occurred evenly: the poles are warming faster than the regions in the middle of the globe. That is having very obvious consequences on floating sea ice at the northern pole; the extent of sea ice in the Arctic has declined by about 40% in the last 40 years. The situation is more complicated, however, around the South Pole, where a thinner ozone layer has a cooling effect. Unlike the Arctic, which is an ocean surrounded by land, the Antarctic is a landmass surrounded by the vast Southern Ocean, which absorbs huge amounts of the heat from the atmosphere. That, along with the continent’s high elevation, also slows down the rate at which it warms. Sea-ice extent around Antarctica was relatively stable until 2014. It has been declining precipitously since then (see chart). One study by a climatologist at America’s NASA reckons that the rate at which Antarctic sea ice receded between 2014 and 2017 was three times faster than during any comparable period in the Arctic. Antarctic sea ice shrinks to a minimum during late February and early March, during the southern hemisphere’s summer. It has hit record lows in 2022 and again now in 2023. These changes have prompted much research into how global warming is affecting Antarctica. Most worrying is what may happen to the enormous West Antarctic ice sheet, which is smaller but less stable than its eastern counterpart. Scientists say that it may collapse if it melts beyond a certain point, which could result in a global sea-level rise of up to three metres. This is regarded as one of climate change’s most consequential “tipping points”. It is unlikely to happen any time soon, but increasing evidence of instability in Antarctica’s ice sheets is cause for concern. ■