To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. THE CHINESE government says more than 80% of the population have been infected with covid-19 since the beginning of December and has declared a “decisive victory” over the virus. Officially, deaths since the start of the pandemic stand at just 87,468—or 0.006% of the population. That the official toll is an undercount is not in question: doctors report being pressed to leave covid off death certificates and people who die at home are not included in the tally. Reports of overwhelmed hospitals and crematoriums suggest a far higher death toll, too. To estimate the true impact of the latest wave of infections, The Economist examined the data in places with more trustworthy numbers (see chart). Macau and Hong Kong are both special administrative regions (SAR) of China. For the most part, they have followed the mainland’s lead on managing covid, using mass testing and harsh restrictions to stamp out the virus (and save lives), followed by the sudden collapse of that policy. The SARs, unlike China, release figures on total death counts—of any cause—which are not known to be fudged. That makes it easier to assess the impact of lifting “zero-covid” measures. (It is still an imperfect estimate; the vaccination rollout, demographics, health-care systems and population density differ across China, Hong Kong and Macau.)Macau and the mainland ended covid restrictions in early December. The best way to measure the impact of this lifting is excess deaths (that is, the number of deaths beyond those expected in any normal year). In Macau around four times more people died that December than is average for the month. That suggests almost 600 people on the island may have died from covid in December alone. Fewer than 700,000 people live in Macau. As a percentage, the jump in deaths would be among the highest the world has seen since the start of the pandemic. Hong Kong eased most of its covid restrictions later in December. But its biggest wave of cases, and subsequent deaths, came earlier, beginning in February 2022. By March deaths were three times the expected number, suggesting that the wave of infections between January 31st and May 2nd was associated with around 10,000 excess deaths. A second wave hit the city in November, as the mainland began lifting some of its own restrictions. Hong Kong’s government has not yet released total mortality figures for this period, but our modelling estimates that there were between 2,000 and 5,000 additional fatalities between November 7th and February 22nd.If applied to mainland China, where around 10m people die in a normal year, these death rates from the first waves in Macau and Hong Kong imply that there were between 1.4m and 2.4m excess deaths on the mainland in December. That range, imperfect as it is, holds up well against other data. Estimates by academics have ranged from 600,000 to 2.3m. Our own modelling in December predicted that 1.5m Chinese people would die if the virus spread unencumbered. Our global excess deaths model, which uses the data from Macau and Hong Kong among many other variables, currently estimates that the pandemic has killed between 180,000 and 2.7m people in China since 2019 (given China’s patchy data, the range is very wide). That would mean a true toll, so far, of between twice and thirty times the official count. ■