IT WAS A night largely devoid of controversy and major surprises. For that, the organisers of the 65th annual Grammy awards on February 5th would doubtless have woken on Monday morning in good spirits. The Recording Academy, which runs the awards, seems to have addressed many of the criticisms that have bedevilled it over the last decade: this year there were no accusations that the nominations or televised performances excluded women or artists of colour. Nor did any stars complain loudly about being snubbed—though their fans did. Admirers of Taylor Swift and Beyoncé were aggrieved that their heroines missed out yet again on two major trophies: Song of the Year in Ms Swift’s case; Album of the Year for Beyoncé’s “Renaissance.” Yet even this potential public-relations disaster was transformed into triumph. Beyoncé’s four victories on Sunday took her to a total of 32, becoming the most-awarded artist in Grammy history (pictured, below). It helped, too, that the winner of Album of the Year—Harry Styles for “Harry’s House”—was a critically acclaimed, commercial hit from an artist in the “imperial phase” of his career, to use Pet Shop Boys’ term. Still, voters divided opinions over their pick for Best Comedy Album. Louis C.K. won in 2022, despite having been “cancelled” in 2017. Several women had accused him of sexual misconduct, which the comedian admitted to. This year Dave Chappelle took home the golden gramophone for the recording of “The Closer”, his stand-up show on Netflix that some viewers judged as transphobic. (For his part, Mr Chappelle rejects that assessment and has said “I am not bending to anybody’s demands.”) For the Grammys, the choice seemed provocative, particularly given the music institution appeared keener than ever to stress its inclusive credentials. Kim Petras, a German singer-songwriter, became the first trans woman to bag a Grammy: “Unholy”, the track she created with Sam Smith, was awarded Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. Awards were handed out across musical genres and social groups. That included seniors: the surprise winner of Song of the Year was 73-year-old Bonnie Raitt for “Just Like That”, her first win in a headline category since 1990. The centrepiece of the televised show was a hip-hop performance curated by Questlove of the Roots in celebration of the genre’s 50th anniversary (pictured, below). Hip-hop’s earliest stars, such as Grandmaster Flash, rapped alongside current hit-makers including Lil Uzi Vert. For all that the judges managed to get right (or at least not get wrong), the Grammys face a problem shared by many big music events. Pop’s atomisation in the digital age means a single vast audience for music no longer exists. Instead it has fragmented into multiple smaller groups, each defined by their listeners’ musical tastes. Fans of Kendrick Lamar may not like Harry Styles’s songs for example, and vice versa. This means a night like the Grammys no longer holds the mass appeal it used to, and the viewing figures reflect this. Less than 10m Americans watched the show each year in 2021 and 2022. By contrast, 26m people tuned in to watch in 2017. This year, in a bid to be as universal as possible, the Academy asked artists to perform only their standout hits, meaning time for more musicians, and thus a wider range of genres, on stage. Nonetheless, the continued failure of Beyoncé or Ms Swift to bag the major prizes that have thus far eluded them raises eyebrows. The Grammys’ newfound focus on inclusivity is welcome, but nor should it come at the expense of celebrating talented artists. The singer of “Midnights”, in particular, must be wondering what she has to do to win Song of the Year, given her near-universally acknowledged status as one of the defining pop artists of this century. (Ms Swift didn’t appear to care, getting to her feet to dance during the performances.) The most heartwarming reaction to what was, on the whole, a somewhat tepid night, came from a tiny publication in England. After Wet Leg, an alternative-rock band, won two prizes for Best Alternative Music Album and Best Alternative Music Performance, their local paper was quick to praise. “Isle of Wight band Wet Leg have won not once but TWICE at the 65th annual Grammy Awards,” the Isle of Wight County Press proclaimed. Compared to Beyoncé’s four new prizes, that really is a triumph. ■