To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. LATIN AMERICA is the most democratic region of the developing world. But it has long been heading in the wrong direction. Its score on the Democracy Index, a yearly ranking by EIU, our sister company, has declined for seven consecutive years. It has recorded the biggest democratic recession of any region over the past 20 years (EIU includes Central America and the Caribbean in this region). Some countries are exceptions but, as our map below reveals, Latin America’s biggest ones are governed by authoritarian or “hybrid” regimes and “flawed democracies” (those that have ineffective governance and low political participation). EIU assesses countries in five categories of democratic health and uses cumulative scores to class governments on a ten-point scale ranging from full democracy to autocracy. Latin America maintains a higher score than all regions apart from North America and Western Europe. But no other region’s score has fallen by as much since 2008 (see chart). In 2022 it fell by 0.04 points; only that of the Middle East fell by more (0.07 points). Last year’s least-democratic Latin American countries were Cuba, Haiti, Nicaragua and Venezuela—whose governments were all classed as authoritarian regimes. But the biggest reason for the region’s democratic decline is the growing number of “hybrid regimes”. In 2008 it had three such regimes; by 2022 it had eight. These may maintain some important democratic practices, such as holding fair elections and respecting civil liberties. But they are often plagued by political polarisation and a loss of faith in the ability of democracies to maintain order, and have a penchant for choosing leaders who flout democratic norms. Two examples are Andrés Manuel López Obrador, Mexico’s president, and Pedro Castillo, Peru’s recently ousted leader. Still, some democratic countries are proving resilient. Last year Costa Rica—known for its generous public services—and Uruguay—which boasts Latin America’s largest middle class—both improved their ranking. Chile also had a good year: it was restored to the status of a “full democracy” after it rolled back some pandemic-related restrictions on civil liberties. The three countries’ combined population is around 28m. But many more people live in countries where democracy is weakening. Brazil, still a flawed democracy despite a transfer of power in a fair election last year, is Latin America’s biggest country, with a population of 214m. Mexico is the second-most populous. Nearly half of the region’s population live under hybrid or authoritarian regimes. In 2022 more than 60% saw their countries’ scores drop. These changes are part of a long, and dispiriting, decline in democratic practices.■