THE SILENCE is the worst part. Every quarter of an hour the bulldozers and cranes digging through mounds of debris stop working, hoping to hear the screams of people trapped underneath. There are none. Instead there are the sobs and prayers of the relatives, friends and other onlookers gathered below. The rubble is all that remains of a 14-storey building in Adana, a city of 1.8m people in southern Turkey. A few hundred metres away the scene repeats itself. Another crowd, another apartment block reduced to a mound of concrete pancakes. The full scale of the devastation caused by the twin 7.8 and 7.5 magnitude earthquakes that struck southern Turkey and northern Syria on February 6th remains unknown. As of February 7th the death toll had reached 4,500 in Turkey alone. In Syria by late afternoon it had passed 1,700. Those numbers are bound to rise further, perhaps by an order of magnitude. Some 6,000 buildings, including apartment blocks such as the ones in Adana, collapsed as a result of the quake, according to Turkish officials. Ovgun Ahmet Ercan, an earthquake expert, estimates that 180,000 people or more may be trapped under the rubble, nearly all of them dead. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, has declared a state of emergency in the ten provinces rocked by the quakes, home to 13m people. Some 100km to the south-east of Adana the scenes are even more apocalyptic. A fire is consuming the port of Iskenderun, a city on the Mediterranean coast, swallowing one shipping container after another and bathing the surrounding mountains in black smoke. Firefighters are nowhere to be seen. A gas station has fallen off a cliff edge. White tents housing those displaced by the quake sprout across the outskirts of towns. Further south, Antakya, a city of 400,000 people that is the successor to ancient Antioch, resembles a city ravaged by years of war. In the city centre, practically every other building has been destroyed. Hunched over and covered with deep cracks, scores of other houses appear to be on the verge of collapse. Corpses pulled from the rubble, wrapped in carpets or blankets, line the main thoroughfare, alongside the wounded, waiting for ambulances. Volunteers and municipal workers distribute meals to hundreds of locals. A heavyset man, badly injured and stretched out on the sidewalk, struggles to remain conscious. “Stay with me,” yells his brother. “We still have so much to do together.” Military helicopters hover overhead. Rescue teams appear overwhelmed. Outside a collapsed house, an elderly woman begs soldiers to use a bulldozer to find her son, trapped inside. The troops try to remove the debris with their hands, explaining that their heavy equipment is being used to look for survivors. “Auntie, we have to make some hard choices,” says one. “There are people screaming for help under the building on the other side of the street, and your son is probably dead.” Down the street a bulldozer clears the wreckage of another destroyed house. A pair of grey feet poke out from underneath. In Syria, the 1,700 reported deaths so far are roughly split between Idlib, a rebel-held province in the north-west, and areas controlled by Bashar al-Assad’s regime. In the north-west, the United Nations says at least 224 buildings were destroyed and 325 damaged. The final count is likely to be much higher. Most people in Idlib are displaced from other areas in Syria, and live in tents or makeshift homes. Eyewitnesses say the earthquake pancaked entire villages. The White Helmets, a civil-defence group that works in the province, were sadly well-prepared to respond: they have spent years digging people out of the ruins after Syrian and Russian airstrikes. But they are stretched thin, with perhaps 3,000 volunteers in a region of more than 4m people. Even when they do reach the wounded, a spokesman for the group says they struggle to provide treatment. In Idlib, Russia and Syria have made a practice of bombing hospitals (a war crime), leaving the province with little medical infrastructure. The Turkish army, which has small bases across Idlib, has sent rescue teams. Support from outside will likely be slow to arrive, both because the region is controlled by rebel groups and because it is difficult to reach. Turkey is Idlib’s lifeline. Some 2.7m people in the province rely on international aid trucked across the border. The deliveries take place without the consent of the Assad regime, under a UN Security Council resolution first passed in 2014. Since 2020, however, the resolution has only allowed shipments via one border crossing, called Bab al-Hawa. The earthquake has rendered it unusable. The airport near Antakya, the closest city to Bab al-Hawa, is shut because of runway damage. Roads to the border are also impassable, as are those between Antakya and Gaziantep, the next-closest airport. On February 7th the UN announced that cross-border aid had been halted. Madevi Sun-Suon, a spokeswoman for the UN’s humanitarian-aid agency, said it was unclear when it might resume. That will slow any earthquake-relief effort. It also portends shortages of food, medicine and other basic goods for millions of people. The situation is no better in regime-held territory. The toll there seems worst in Aleppo, Syria’s second city, but there is also widespread damage in Hama, a province to the south, and Latakia, on the coast. The latter is particularly sensitive for the regime: it is the Assad family’s historic home and largely stayed loyal throughout the civil war. The regime has not done well with previous crises. When wildfires swept western Syria in 2020 and burned more than 30,000 hectares of land, the state struggled to put them out. During the pandemic it put out wildly inaccurate case numbers. It will have trouble sending supplies to hard-hit areas: fuel is already scarce across Syria, owing to a shortage of hard currency. Mr Assad, whose regime is under international sanctions, has few friends. He also has a habit of spurning offers of help or stealing foreign aid. A few countries have offered support. Russia, which has a military presence in Syria, said its soldiers would help clear rubble. The United Arab Emirates sent humanitarian aid via cargo plane. Algeria, Egypt and Iran have also promised to help. But few of these countries are willing and able to send much aid. Damage from the earthquake will mean more misery in a country already battered by a decade of war. In Turkey frustration is setting in, as is the sense that parts of the country have been abandoned. The government says it has deployed 18,000 gendarmes and 10,000 police to the disaster areas. Hundreds of ambulances, police and army trucks crowd the road into Antakya. Some soldiers have been redeployed from Turkish-occupied areas of Syria. But the rescue effort seems to rely mostly on volunteers, who have poured into the earthquake zone from all corners of Turkey. “They don’t have enough equipment,” says a man sitting outside the rubble of his mother’s house in Antakya, referring to Turkey’s disaster agency. “They can’t cope with this.” ■