It’s the quiet that strikes you on reaching Syria. In the aftermath of two big earthquakes last week the din of ambulances and rescue trucks in southern Turkey was deafening. Just over the border in the Syrian town of Jandaris, the silence was eerie. Five days after the earthquakes, no international aid had reached Jandaris. Hardly any rescue equipment was available to dig out those buried. The White Helmets, a volunteer emergency-response force that sprang up during Syria’s civil war to extract people from bombed buildings, are doing their best, but they are thinly stretched. Jandaris is part of the last remaining swathe of Syrian territory held by rebel forces, some of whom have been fighting President Bashar al-Assad for more than a decade. The enclave, where much of the damage from last week’s earthquakes occurred, runs along Syria’s north-western border with Turkey, and is home to 4.5m people. The White Helmets have just 3,000 volunteers. In some of the ruined streets of Jandaris I didn’t see a single soul; in others a lone person picked through the rubble as they waited for help to arrive. Local people said they were haunted by the memory of the screams from under the concrete, many of which faded away before a proper rescue effort could even begin. One of these cries came from a 14-year-old boy called Mouaz. He had been fast asleep when the ground beneath him started shaking in the early hours of Monday morning. Panicked, he started running for the front door, then realised he wouldn’t get there in time. He saw his parents and siblings heading for the basement, and followed them. Then everything went dark. He slipped in and out of consciousness in the hours that followed. All he was aware of when awake was the excruciating pain in his leg. From the waist down he was trapped in the wreckage. A concrete slab had landed so close to his face he could barely breathe. Outside, though he did not know it, his uncle, Mohammed, was digging with his bare hands, straining to hear signs of life from the pile of mangled concrete and metal. Mohammed kept on through the icy hours removing one piece of rubble at a time. On the first day he managed to rescue Mouaz’s seven-year-old brother. On the second day some neighbours came with shovels to help him. It was three days before Mohammed was able to attract the attention of the White Helmets. They lifted pieces of wreckage and, eventually, Mohammed was able to make out the faint sound of his nephew’s voice. Mouaz’s family had come to north-west Syria in 2018, like so many others, in order to escape the bombing campaign waged by Assad and his Russian allies. He was born in Harasta, a town in the eastern suburbs of Damascus. When anti-government protests broke out there in 2011 he was just a toddler. Within a few months the uprising had turned into a bloody civil war. The eastern suburbs became a stronghold for the rebels, and Assad’s army sealed the area off. Mouaz’s earliest memories are of a life lived during the five-year siege. He and his siblings spent most of their childhood sheltering from bombs. They were too scared of the shelling to go to school – civic buildings were routinely attacked by Assad’s forces. Sometimes they would sneak to their teacher’s house to have lessons. Very occasionally it was calm enough for them to play football in the street. In 2018, a month before the family escaped, Mouaz’s older brother Abdulrahman, who was 11, thought he’d take advantage of a quiet moment to go out and buy some food. There was an airstrike while he was on his shopping trip and the family never saw him again. In March 2018 residents of the siege were offered a deal: they could leave their homes and take a bus to the rebel-held north-west, or they could stay and suffer the consequences. In the past such deals had been a prelude to a gruesome assault, and Mouaz’s family took up the offer to go north. Mouaz hadn’t wanted to leave his friends behind, in spite of all the hardships, but he understood his family’s decision. His father, Radwan, who had owned his own leather-making business in Harasta before the war, struggled to find work at first, but eventually he started a grocery shop in Jandaris. Life was still hard. Different armed groups vied for control of the north-western region (Jandaris is ruled by a militia loyal to Turkey). Rents were exorbitant because millions of refugees from other parts of Syria were also trying to find a home there. But Mouaz and his family managed to rebuild their lives, and stay close together; his uncle Mohammed, who had left Harasta with them, lived a short drive away. The children were back in school. For the first time in years, Mouaz felt safe. On February 6th Mouaz spent the evening helping his father in the shop, then went to bed. A few hours later two tectonic plates beneath the earth juddered. By the time he was pulled out, his mother, father, sister and one of his brothers were dead. At least 35,000 people are estimated to have been killed so far by the earthquake, more than 5,000 of them in Syria. Part of the reason the toll is smaller on the Syrian side of the border is that many of the people there were refugees living in tents. The devastation wrought on communities here is still immense, and chillingly indiscriminate. A newborn baby girl pulled alive from the rubble of Jandaris gave the world an image of hope. But just a few streets away from her home I met a man called Ahmad, who had found his 20-day-old baby crushed by a brick. Around 4,000 families in Jandaris have lost their homes, the mayor told me. Turkey has donated some tents, but there are only 1,200 to go around. Aid has been slow to reach government-controlled parts of Syria, but it’s nothing compared with the isolation of places like Jandaris. A number of political factors have held up the delivery of aid to the north-west One is the United Nations. During the war, Russia, Syria’s ally on the UN Security Council, used its veto to ban international aid deliveries to the rebel-held areas through all but one crossing point, which was damaged in the earthquake. Jandaris has been cut off not only from the supplies needed to help earthquake victims but the basic goods that its impoverished population already depended on, such as baby formula. A week after the earthquakes the UN announced that Assad had agreed to allow aid through two more crossings, though it is still unclear when deliveries will begin. In Jandaris the sense of abandonment was ubiquitous. “All of the world is against us,” said 30-year-old Ahmad Yassen. “We stood in the face of a dictator and asked for our rights, and instead we were bombed and then abandoned again and again.” I met Mouaz in a hospital in the nearby town of Afrin, just as he was absorbing the enormity of what had happened to him. “I feel like a stranger to myself,” he said. “I have no one now.” Astonishingly, the only physical injury he suffered was a broken leg. Mouaz was stoic beyond his years during our conversation, even breaking into a half-smile when he described the moment of being rescued. “I felt like I was being born again when I saw the light,” he said. His uncle, Mohammed, sits at his bedside day and night. Mouaz is grateful for his presence. Mohammed says he took the news about the loss of his family calmly, as perhaps only a child of Syria’s war can. “He understands.” ■ Abbie Cheeseman is a freelance Middle East reporter Photographs: Rena Effendi