THE TWO biggest crossover superstars in the history of country music—hitmakers who have become equally famous in the wider world of pop while remaining country artists first and foremost—are both women. Both had to overcome tough personal circumstances, then industry prejudice, to forge their careers. Both have been accused of opportunism, trading on their appearance and diluting their music. Both have seen off all these obstacles, and these criticisms, through their work. They are separated chiefly by age. Dolly Parton is 77. Shania Twain is 20 years Ms Parton’s junior, and grew up inspired by her. She could hardly have chosen a more suitable role model. “Dolly Parton was just someone that would remain herself, and followed her own vision regardless of other opinions,” Ms Twain told The Economist. “I always saw her as someone fearless.” Where Ms Parton has been prolific—averaging close to a studio album every year since 1967—Ms Twain has been the opposite. Her sixth album, “Queen of Me”, arrives on February 3rd, 30 years after her self-titled debut. It testifies to the scale of Ms Twain’s success that her previous five records have sold an estimated combined total of more than 100m copies: a similar number to Ms Parton’s vast body of work. “Queen of Me” balances songs reminiscent of her commercial pomp (“Giddy Up!”, “Not Just a Girl”, “Pretty Liar”) with more contemporary numbers (“Number One”, “Brand New”, “Best Friend”). It marks a milestone for Ms Twain, whose career was derailed in 2003 after she contracted Lyme disease. The infection caused dysphonia, a vocal-chord condition; after an extraordinary run of three blockbuster albums—“The Woman in Me” (1995), “Come On Over” (1997) and “Up!” (2002)—she was largely absent from the studio for over a decade. Rebuilding both her voice and her confidence was a formidable challenge. She would not release another album until “Now” in 2017. Last year’s Netflix documentary, “Not Just A Girl”, focused on the ups and downs of Ms Twain’s life and career as well as her relationship with the music business. She grew up in Timmins, Ontario, in a home that was poor and violent. She hid herself in music but, pushed by her mother, was singing in bars from the age of eight. When she was 22, her mother and stepfather died in a car crash, and she became breadwinner and caregiver to three younger siblings. “In order to secure myself, I needed to make it. I didn’t have a choice,” she says. “I didn’t know that I was going to ever get to where I am right now. But I’m the type of person that just keeps going.” She was in her late 20s when she signed a recording contract and released a debut album. Although “Shania Twain” did not sell well—and she felt it did not represent her creative talent—it was warmly received among critics and brought her to the attention of Robert John Lange, universally known as “Mutt”. The South African rock producer had a series of major albums to his name, most notably by AC/DC, and was known for his signature sleek, yet hefty, sound. They became collaborators, then spouses. Ms Twain’s next album, “The Woman in Me”, written entirely by the married couple and produced by Mr Lange, would do for country music what Mr Lange’s work with Def Leppard had done for heavy metal: transform it into a best-selling crossover pop product. It was certified “diamond” (ie, it sold more than 10m copies). “We were a perfect fit,” Ms Twain says. “So much of my music education had come from pop and rock. We understood each other. We understood each other’s music.” She says she often worked on the lyrics as he oversaw the arrangements. The result was a mixture of catchy, crunchy rock guitar and down-home country verities—three riffs and the truth—but there was no guarantee it would appeal to listeners. “When Mutt started doing the arrangements, and they were sounding quite rocky, then I started thinking: ‘Am I gonna get kicked off the label? Is this going to get me kicked out of town?’” Two more diamond albums followed. Unfortunately, so did personal difficulties. In keeping with the tradition that the lives of country stars resemble the narratives of country songs, Ms Twain says Mr Lange had an affair with Ms Twain’s best friend. (Though the pair denied it.) Ms Twain and Mr Lange separated in 2008. In a further twist, Ms Twain would go on to marry the best friend’s former husband. Though the importance of her musical partnership with Mr Lange is widely acknowledged, assessments of Ms Twain’s career often overlook the crucial role played by her music videos. She edited them herself, thereby shaping and defining her own image on the global stage and making the most of a golden age of music television. “Editing those very career-changing videos was as important, I think, as writing my own songs,” says Ms Twain. “I was dead set on the visuals being very musical; they had to enhance the music, had to enhance the song.” Harry Styles credits Ms Twain as a major visual inspiration, just as Taylor Swift refers to her as a musical influence. Country remains Ms Twain’s artistic home, but nobody, perhaps not even Ms Parton, has done more to open it up. She invited the world to come on over, and it did. ■