To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. JUST AS THE Super Bowl is America’s most-watched sporting event, it also attracts the most interest from punters. Sports betting has grown rapidly in the country since the Supreme Court legalised its expansion in 2018, and this year’s Super Bowl will be the first held in a state where betting on the game is legal. An estimated 50m people are predicted to wager a total of $16bn on the National Football League’s championship game, between the Philadelphia Eagles and the Kansas City Chiefs, on February 12th. In general, pricing in such liquid markets tends to be highly efficient, making profits hard to come by after bookmakers take their cut. In the case of the Super Bowl, however, the game’s unique popularity creates a lucrative opportunity for savvy bettors. At least in recent years one simple, robotic strategy would have fared remarkably well. Casual punters account for a much larger share of money bet on the Super Bowl than on other NFL contests. Just as they tend to bet on their preferred team to win the game, they also bet on star players to excel. In theory, if they bet enough on players performing better than expected, sportsbooks seeking to balance their risk will reduce payouts on such scenarios—and increase the returns they offer for bets that those players will disappoint. Some of the most popular wagers in this genre are on whether a player will amass more or fewer yards in a game than a given number specified by bookmakers, whether he will score a touchdown and whether he will win the game’s Most Valuable Player (MVP) award. Comprehensive historical data on such bets are hard to come by. But Circa, a sportsbook in Las Vegas, has provided The Economist with full records on the odds it has offered for bets on the Super Bowl since it opened in 2019. And it turns out that a portfolio designed by robotically taking the “under” on players’ yards and “no” on touchdown-scoring and MVP—the opposite of casual bettors’ preferences —would have yielded double-digit percentage returns in each of the past three Big Games. Before receiving any data from Circa, we specified simple rules for this “under-and-no” strategy. Every year, the portfolio would bet equal amounts on the “under” on yards for each team’s starting quarterback, leading rusher and top two pass-catchers. Similarly, it would bet the same amount on “no touchdown” for each team’s three players most likely to score one and “no MVP” for each team’s leading MVP candidate. The strategy would follow these rules blindly, regardless of the players’ identities, the over/under thresholds for their yards or the odds of them scoring touchdowns or winning MVP. A bettor who followed these rules at Circa would have earned returns of 17.5% in 2020; 28.0% in 2021; and 10.6% last year. Assuming that the bettor reinvested profits from year to year, the cumulative gain would be 66.3%—before counting any further return that the funds could generate throughout the rest of the year, either from other sports bets or from conventional financial investments. Circa opened too recently for us to draw robust conclusions about this strategy’s long-run profitability. In years like 2018, when the Super Bowl delivered lots of yards and touchdowns, the portfolio would have suffered grave losses. Nonetheless, veteran professional sports bettors regularly preach the wisdom of betting on “unders and “no’s”. Based on these data, it seems punters could profit from a little more pessimism.■