To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. TREATING SOMEONE to a date on Valentine’s Day can cost a pretty penny. But in some cities it takes a prettier penny than in others. Our sister company, EIU, collects the prices of about 350 goods in 173 cities for its Worldwide Cost of Living survey. Using its latest report, we ranked the 15 most expensive cities based on the bill for a romantic night out: drinks at a swanky hotel, followed by dinner and a movie, a taxi home and a bottle of wine to cap things off (see chart). Consider this a rough guide—EIU gathers prices with expatriates and business travellers, not locals, in mind. At the top of the list is Shanghai, where our notional date could set lovers back $655. That is $195 more than in Abu Dhabi, the 15th-priciest city. St Petersburg and Moscow take third and sixth place, respectively; Western sanctions over Russia’s war in Ukraine have driven up the cost of small luxuries there. In nearly every city dinner is the most expensive component of the night. The exception is Manama, the capital of Bahrain, where a bottle of wine costs more than a meal for two. But the night out is only half the story. What about the prep? We also ranked cities based on the cost of preening. As anyone on the dating scene will know, that takes investment too—26 more minutes a day than for married people, according to a recent study published in Evolution and Human Behaviour, a journal. So into our basket of goods goes a monthly gym membership, lipstick and haircuts. Little surprise that Los Angeles—a city of celebrities and fitness influencers—comes top of our prep list, at $480. EIU reckon a haircut and blow-dry at an upscale salon there will set women back $261; only in New York and London does the cost of coiffing also exceed $200. “Baby, credit cards aren’t romance”, Jennifer Lopez insisted in her hit single “Love Don’t Cost a Thing”. If only that were true. A large body of research demonstrates the importance of status and looks in mating. Romance may be emotionally enriching, but it costs a thing.■ Read more about the EIU’s cost of living survey: The world’s most, and least, expensive citiesThese are the most expensive cities in North AmericaThe world’s most, and least, affordable cities are in AsiaThese are the most expensive cities in Europe