FROM ELEVATOR muzak and call-centre hold-music to TV and film soundtracks, “The Four Seasons” by Antonio Vivaldi supplies an inescapable backdrop to everyday life. Yet these ubiquitous earworms have a context and history, which began three centuries ago. The Venetian composer may have completed his quartet of violin concertos, part of a dozen-strong set entitled “The Contest Between Harmony and Invention”, in 1723, or perhaps a little earlier. Printed in Amsterdam in 1725, the concertos met with 18th-century fame, then prolonged obscurity, before enjoying a resurgence of popularity in the 20th century. With familiarity came over-exposure, indifference, even undeserved contempt. For Adrian Chandler, a violinist and the founder-director of the Baroque ensemble—and Vivaldi specialists—La Serenissima, “it’s a crying shame that people don’t realise what a genius he was.” Mr Chandler underlines the originality of the sequence’s format. Each concerto evokes the climate and customs of its season with vivid descriptive episodes—birdsong, gales, frost, barking dogs and so on—often specified in the score. (Play “like a sleeping goatherd”, runs one instruction.) Earlier Baroque composers had imitated natural sounds, yet this full-scale “programmatic” plan was novel. A set of pastoral sonnets, perhaps by Vivaldi himself, accompanied the music. Vivaldi spent much of his career as the music director of a girls’ orphanage in Venice: it is possible he wrote the “Seasons” with a star pupil, a violinist known as Anna Maria della Pietà, in mind. He also composed operas. Indeed, “Spring” shares a theme with one: “Il Giustino”. The appeal of “The Four Seasons” rests on dramatic transitions from one cleverly staged scene—hunts, merry-making, storms—to another. For Mr Chandler, the work is “like an opera, but for one voice: the violin”. From sultry summer to shivering winter, its unexpected harmonies surprise and delight. That trailblazing sparkle quickly won European fame. Pirated editions were circulated soon after the first printing in Amsterdam; Anthony Pryer, a musicologist, says the compositions became “transnational works”. Johann Sebastian Bach discreetly borrowed from “Spring” in a cantata of 1726 and, in 1775, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, a philosopher and sometime composer, arranged the concerto for solo flute. During the 19th century the works, and their composer’s reputation, went into hibernation. Then shoots of recovery began to sprout. As a youngster Edward Elgar learned from Vivaldi scores. In 1913 Fritz Kreisler, a violin virtuoso, wrote a pastiche Vivaldi concerto and passed it off as an original. In 1926 the acquisition of a cache of manuscripts from a monastery by Turin National University Library kick-started a revival. It led, via a “Vivaldi Week” in Siena in 1939, to a recording of the piece in 1942 by Rome’s Orchestra dell’Accademia di Nazionale Santa Cecilia. Bernardino Molinari, the conductor, dedicated his transcription of the “Seasons” to Benito Mussolini. Vivaldi’s cycle needed advocates untainted by the Italian dictator and fascism. It was a prize-winning recording of 1947 by Louis Kaufman, an American violinist, which opened the path to global renown. From the 1950s each new audio technology—stereo, cassette, CD, digital streaming—brought fresh interpretations. The concertos’ 12 movements, each three or four minutes long, fitted radio playlists as snugly as a soft Venetian glove. A revival of interest in period instruments resulted in lighter, pacier renditions than the full-cream orchestral sounds of the past. More than 100 separate recordings vied for listeners’ favour. A few even broke out from narrow channels of the classical scene into the wider ocean of pop-culture celebrity. Released in 1989, Nigel Kennedy’s eccentric but dazzling version (punk Vivaldi, to some critics) sold more than 3m copies. Soon after, call centres and mobile-phone firms chose to feed tinny offcuts from the “Seasons” into people’s ears. The concertos have been played on every kind of music-making device, from Moog synthesiser to rock guitar and Japanese koto. A part-electronic remix of “The Four Seasons” by Max Richter, a German-born British composer, has been streamed 450m times and been included on soundtracks for shows including “Bridgerton” and “The Crown”. In 2022, with Elena Urioste, a violinist, he concocted yet another hybrid version. Mr Chandler, whose own erudite but impassioned recording with La Serenissima won plaudits, declines to scoff at the remixers: “If it gets the message across, why not?” He suspects Vivaldi, a “pragmatic individual”, would have enjoyed these shape-shifting renewals. And he welcomes new stylistic spins “so long as it is played with love”. After 300 years of musical heatwaves, freezes and downpours, that love endures. ■