To read more of The Economist’s data journalism visit our Graphic Detail page. THRILL-SEEKERS love a rollercoaster; investors, not so much. The recent whiplash from Disney’s share price has been akin to the rides at its theme parks: a few moments of elation as it ticks up, then, with a lurch, comes the drop. After 12 stellar months in 2020-21, the firm’s market value fell by nearly half in 2022 as Wall Street became wary of Hollywood’s long-term prospects (see chart). Bob Iger, Disney’s on-again, off-again chief executive, was brought out of retirement last year to get the kingdom back in order. On February 8th he announced that revenues grew by 8% year-on-year in the three months to December and the number of subscribers to its streaming services held up better than expected, even after Disney+ raised its prices. But the cheery financial data were not the main excitement of Wednesday’s call. Instead, investors clung to their seats to hear Mr Iger’s plans for Disney’s future. He announced that 7,000 people, or 3.6% of its workforce, would be laid off as the firm embarks on a $5.5bn cost-savings push. The company will be reorganised into three separate units as part of that effort. Streaming will be merged with film and television under a new Disney Entertainment unit. Sports will become its own unit, featuring ESPN and ESPN+. The lucrative parks business, which includes its cruise ships and consumer products, will make up the third. The task ahead is a big one. Disney is under fire from Nelson Peltz, an activist investor, who is demanding a seat on the board and has complained about the firm’s creaking balance-sheet. Its foundations for growth are looking wobbly. Disney’s reliance on cable is unsustainable. The prime-time audience of ABC, a broadcast network owned by Disney, has fallen by nearly a third in the past four years. Cinema has not fully recovered from covid-19, and may never do so. And Disney’s streaming empire—which included Hulu and ESPN+—has grown rapidly, but at a huge cost. The division lost another $1bn last quarter as it struggles to compete with the likes of Apple TV and Amazon Prime Video. Tech giants have no need to make money from streaming, which they see as an add-on to their main business. On this, Hollywood studios struggle to compete. Disney, which is celebrating its centenary this year, still has a lot going for it. Its films rule the box office, with four of the ten highest-grossing movies of 2022 coming from its catalogue. Its theme parks remain a bright spot on its earnings sheet. Another successful era for the company is not beyond reach. Investors hope that Mr Iger’s overhaul will bring a touch of magic back to the old brand. ■ Read more of our coverage on Disney and the streaming industry: As Disney turns 100, its business is on a rollercoaster rideDisney’s troubles show how technology has changed the business of cultureDisney brings back a star of the past. But its real problem is the scriptWhat Disney can learn from Elton John