By Jeffrey Reppucci A whistle jolted me awake. The last thing I remembered was the sound my body made as it crashed against the plexiglass. When I opened my eyes I saw my teammates standing around me in a circle. They clapped their sticks and fans cheered as I stumbled to my feet. I gagged on my way to the bench, fighting back the urge to vomit. “You OK, Pooch?” The coaches bent down to check on me as I sat, heart racing. I nodded at each of them reflexively. “All good, just a little shaken up.” That’s what you said in situations like this. Play resumed on the rink. I was told later that I had assisted on two goals. But I don’t remember that. What I do remember is the voice of a nurse who attended to me after the game, telling me to keep my head still as a motorised gurney drew me into a whirring CT scanner. That happened when I was 17, in my final year at high school. Ten years later I tripped on an open suitcase and hit my head on a bookshelf. At that point I hadn’t played competitive ice hockey in eight years, and thought I was in good health. But the cumulative effect of multiple brain traumas appears to have caught up with me. After that minor household stumble, everything changed. I had to go on disability leave from work for 18 months because of recurrent headaches, nausea and dizziness. Reading began to feel unnatural and painful. Phone calls with my family, even brief ones, became difficult. And the chronic pain warped my personality. Somewhere inside my skull, the repeated concussions I endured playing high-school and college hockey had taken an inescapable toll. I was six years old when I took my first hard knock to the head, and I sustained my first diagnosed concussion at 14. Growing up in Newburyport, a small town north of Boston, hockey was my life. I had dreams of making it to the top of the sport, and thought that playing through concussions was just part of being tough. Most of my teammates did too. My favourite hockey player, Paul Kariya, sustained a severe concussion in a brutal collision in 2003, during the Stanley Cup finals, the championship series of the National Hockey League (NHL). I watched live as he lay motionless for 48 seconds before being helped off the ice by his teammates. He returned to the game shortly afterwards and scored. In high school I used to watch clips of the moment on YouTube to feel inspired. Kariya’s heroics are still remembered by hockey players and fans today. But he has no memory of scoring that goal or of the game he played in two days later. Subsequent concussions would end his career. To the credit of the NHL, under today’s player-safety protocols Kariya would not have returned to the game. A growing number of retired players from the NHL and the National Football League (NFL) who suffer from chronic traumatic encephalopathy, a degenerative brain condition, have drawn attention to the long-term consequences of repeated blows to the head. Years of outcry driven by their advocacy – along with lawsuits over the handling of concussions in the NFL – have pushed sports leagues across America to introduce “concussion protocols” to evaluate whether players can safely return to games. (Some sports bodies have banned all but incidental contact from their youth leagues, which would have spared me a few bruises.) If a star quarterback suffers a dizzying hit in a big game now, even in the Super Bowl, there is a reasonable chance he would be forced to the bench. This is progress. But fans still don’t quite understand the expectations created when they celebrate examples of supposed heroism like Kariya’s – expectations that push athletes to do anything they can to keep playing. One way they can stay out on the ice or the field is to game the safety protocols. Concussions differ from orthopaedic injuries – an athlete can’t talk themselves into a healthy range-of-motion test or clear scan of their knee. At the amateur levels of sport, a concussion protocol is often just a trainer repeatedly asking you subjective questions, like “how do you feel now?” and “rate your lightheadedness on a scale of 1-10”. When our trainer in college introduced a cognitive test that would measure our ordinary functioning in order to help diagnose concussion, I deliberately flunked it. Words and colours flashed up on a computer screen to test your reaction time and memory; I made sure to be both slow and forgetful. So did many others. As I waited with my teammates to take the test, mischievous whispers ran up and down the queue. “We have to sandbag the test a little, so that if you do get a conkie they can’t take you out or keep you out for long.” Surveys show that most American high-school athletes feel that decisions about whether an injured player can return should be based on the importance of the game, rather than the risk to his or her health. All 50 states in America now have laws requiring that younger athletes who have sustained a concussion receive medical clearance before playing again. But enforcing these laws is extremely difficult, as there is rarely a doctor around and much is left to the discretion of schools – not to mention the challenges of diagnosing and treating concussions as they happen. In 2017 about 2.5m high-school athletes reported suffering at least one concussion in the prior year, according to one study; in another study of high-school athletes, 40% said their coaches were unaware of their concussion symptoms. Spoken and unspoken norms need to change so kids take concussions seriously, regardless of the “stakes” of the game. The top sports leagues have been too slow to set an example. During the past NFL season Tua Tagovailoa, the Miami Dolphins quarterback, went wobbly after a hit and fell down, only to return to play, having been deemed by a team doctor and an independent neurological consultant not to have sustained a concussion. (The consultant, put in place jointly by the NFL and the player’s union, was later fired by the union.) Four days later a national audience watched in horror as he was hit again and seized up on the field in a “fencing response”, a serious involuntary neurological reaction to a concussion in which both arms extend away from the body, typically into the air, in an unnatural-looking posture. It is considered an indicator of serious brain trauma. Weeks later Tagovailoa suffered yet another concussion; some doctors have said publicly he should retire from football because of the risk of repeated concussions leading to brain damage. I faced a similar choice, albeit without fame and fortune at stake, at the College of the Holy Cross, a university west of Boston that competes in the top division of American collegiate ice hockey. It was my second year at university, and we were on a winning streak towards the end of the season. Late in a tied game, I had been caught off balance in the most dangerous place on the ice: two feet away from the sideboards. A hit near the boards can lead to a dangerous double collision. Rather than a player squeezing you against the barrier in one continuous crunch, which allows you to brace yourself, you fly into it with an uncontrolled bang. That can be the difference between an annoying bruise and breaking a bone. My opponent nailed me with a body check that sent me head-first into the boards. My brain bounced around my skull, causing a concussion. The lights flickered off and on in my head. I struggled to get back to my feet. I felt woozy, but the game was at a crucial turning point. The hit had drawn a penalty, giving us a temporary one-man advantage, and I needed to get back on the ice to lead the attack. Even concussed, I knew what to say to stay in the game – I’d been through the routine many times before. I don’t recall my exact words but I had intuited the talking points and emotional register to use with a trainer or doctor: “I just got startled more than anything else. If I get a headache, I’ll tell you right away. I can go back in, I know what to look for. Come on, I’m good!” It all caught up with me six hours later. I lay in my dormitory bed at 3am, heart racing, with a throbbing headache. I knew then that I needed an extended rest, but the upcoming games were crucial. I felt like my teammates, who were being treated for things like sprained shoulders and bleeding gashes, would look down on me for not playing because of an injury no one could see. I didn’t want to let them down. And I worried that another player might take my place for good. So I cut a few corners during the return-to-play protocol. (It helped that I had sandbagged the baseline test six months earlier.) I was cleared to play the following week. As we lined up in the tunnel to take to the ice for my next game, my ears began to ring from the arena’s blaring speakers, a sign that something was wrong. I had a premonition that this would be my last game of the season. In the third period, I was hit while skating on the open ice. The impact jarred my head and knocked me dizzy. I stepped out of the game and never played again. For a year after I hit my head on the bookshelf, I would lie in bed, unable to read or watch TV without pain and visual discomfort. A simple trip to the grocery store would drive me crazy. A healthy brain can drown out a supermarket’s cacophony of sounds; mine heard the low hum of the refrigeration cases and the jangling of shopping carts as if a high-school orchestra were tuning up inside my ear. I went weekly to a rehab hospital for occupational- and cognitive-therapy sessions. On a good day I could listen to a podcast, do some light exercise and help my partner, Leah, cook dinner. But on a bad day I would wear earplugs as we ate in silence. Leah would then lie on the floor next to me while I counted breaths to calm my throbbing migraines. I had what is called post-concussion syndrome, something that occurs in as many as one in five concussions. There is no known cure. For many, symptoms begin to fade away after a few months. For me, they didn’t. Many sufferers seek alternative remedies online. Search Apple’s AppStore and you’ll find over 60 concussion-management apps. I tried meditation, anti-inflammatory diets, acupuncture, supplements and special glasses that filter out certain wavelengths of light. I knew many neurologists doubted the efficacy of these treatments: the costs can be high and the benefits dubious. Still, I began each “healing hack” with the same optimism evinced by the self-help gurus peddling them. My headaches persisted. After a year – and trips to four different concussion clinics for treatment – I made a breakthrough. Like an athlete, I followed a regimented recovery plan for the next six months: in the morning, high-intensity workouts with weights, followed by exercises to improve my balance and co-ordination; after lunch, reading and cognitive drills, such as visual puzzles and multi-tasking exercises; before dinner, a 30-minute stationary bike ride and, most challenging, spending some time in a highly stimulating and uncontrolled environment. For this last exercise, I would take an evening walk around a supermarket, and grimace as an employee pushed the reverberating floor buffer around. My pain and depression began to ease. Ultimately, the fellow patients I met at concussion clinics – athletes, military veterans, teachers, an advertising executive – proved to be more helpful than any exercise or remedy. I felt part of a team again. The discipline and camaraderie that fuelled my love of hockey were now driving my recovery. Twenty months after my accident, I returned to my full-time job at a tech company for a few months, then enrolled in graduate school at Stanford. I’m in my fourth year of recovery. It’s a journey I feel good about now. And I don’t regret where it started, on the ice. But now that awareness about the dangers of concussion is increasing, the culture of sports needs to catch up. I would prefer to spare young athletes from a bang into the sideboards that propels them down the path I took. Jeffrey Reppucci is a former NCAA Division I ice-hockey player and recipient of the Hockey Humanitarian Award. He is currently a Knight-Hennessy Scholar at Stanford University Illustrations: ANGELICA PAEZ