Read more of our recent coverage of the Ukraine crisis. ONE YEAR into Vladimir Putin’s bloody campaign in Ukraine the war shows no sign of ending. Russia’s president gave a rambling speech on February 21st, blaming the West entirely for provoking his “special military operation” (as he calls the invasion). The West did not order Russian tanks into Ukraine, but it has provided valuable help in destroying them. Around €40bn ($42.6bn) in assistance was pledged to Ukraine in December alone, in the form of military, financial and humanitarian aid (see chart). If Ukraine is to have any chance of defending itself, the assistance will have to keep flowing. The latest estimates from the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, a German research outfit that tracks foreign governments’ assistance to Ukraine, show that support hit a record high in December 2022. America is still Ukraine’s biggest backer, having provided more than half of all recorded commitments since January 2022. (The report is a partial list of what has been committed—some countries are more transparent about their donations than others.) America’s economy is the largest in the world (at market exchange rates). But contributions by Europe’s biggest economies have also trailed behind America’s as a percentage of their GDPs. France, for example, has committed just 0.1% of its output to Ukraine, compared with America’s 0.4% (though France’s unwillingness to disclose how much it gives to Ukraine makes it hard to establish an exact figure). In Europe it is Ukraine’s closest neighbours, which are much less rich than countries farther west, that have pledged the most. Poland, for instance, has committed 0.6% of its GDP. The Kiel Institute’s report, published on February 21st and covering assistance up to January 15th, does not include the latest wave of pledges in the form of tanks. On January 25th, after much hesitation, Germany agreed to send some of its own Leopard tanks, as well as to allow other countries to re-export theirs. That coincided with a flurry of other commitments from NATO members to send more tanks, which Ukraine desperately needs. Decades of under-investment in defence means that Europe is not as well stocked as America. That has implications for how much military aid Europe is able to send. But a shortage of weapons should not prevent it from providing money, which Ukraine also needs. EU institutions (including the Commission and Council, as well as the European Peace Facility and the European Investment Bank) have now pledged €30.3bn in financial aid. But America is the biggest individual giver, at €25.1bn. The European laggards risk jeopardising Ukraine’s ability to defend itself—and Europe—from Russia. They also risk weakening America’s readiness to keep helping. A vocal faction of the Republican party is becoming increasingly critical of America’s spending on Europe’s war and public support is beginning to wane. Nonetheless, Joe Biden, America’s president, travelled to Kyiv to reaffirm America’s commitment to Ukraine’s defence. During his visit he announced the release of a further $500m tranche of military assistance. American aid remains crucial for Ukraine. European allies should step up their support.■