On Monday morning, two hours after an immense earthquake shook Antakya, a city in south-east Turkey, Ayhan Mansuroglu ran towards the flat of his 42-year-old younger brother, Sedat. He’d heard from his mother and sister, and was relieved that they were alive, but it was impossible to get through to Sedat. Something, he felt, was wrong. When he arrived at the block of flats on Ataturk Avenue, a swanky road in the middle of the city, the building was unrecognisable. Seven floors had been reduced to a pile of rubble. Sedat had been on the fourth floor. There were no rescue teams in sight, nor any excavating equipment. All around him, people were frantically searching for family members. Mansuroglu started to dig with his hands. He kept going until it was light, when he unearthed a yellow-brown carpet from the rubble. He called his wife, sister and mother, who came down to the site. Hamide, Mansuroglu’s mother, took one look at the carpet and knew it was her son’s. Mansuroglu kept digging. Then, to the right of the carpet, squeezed between a mattress and a collapsed ceiling, he saw a foot. Hamide let out a cry. She called out to her son, but he didn’t answer. She pleaded with Sedat to move his foot if he was alive. According to her recollection, he wiggled his toes. But the rubble burying Sedat was too heavy to move by hand, and there was little more the family could do by themselves to rescue him. Over the next 36 hours, the Mansuroglu family stood outside the building and waited. A second big earthquake hit the region on Monday afternoon. At least five teams of rescue workers passed by, but they couldn’t help. There were simply not enough diggers in the city to rescue the thousands of trapped people. Around them the city teemed with others similarly desperate to unearth their family and friends. Jihan Haj Bakri, a Syrian journalist living in Antakya with her extended family, reckons that 50 of her relatives have been killed. In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, people stumbled out of their homes into the bitterly cold night, dressed only in pyjamas. According to one rescue worker, some buildings collapsed in on themselves like “cheese toast”; others tottered sideways. The streets were littered with beds and blankets, keyboards and fans, even treadmills. Almost no building has been left unscathed. Those left standing are now riven with deep cracks and are unfit for habitation. Since the earthquakes hit Turkey and Syria, over 11,000 people are estimated to have been killed, more than 8,700 of these in Turkey. The World Health Organisation fears that the total number of dead could reach over 20,000. The first earthquake struck over 100km north-east of Antakya. It was so big that buildings collapsed in the city of Diyarbakir, almost 350km from the epicentre. The reverberations were felt as far away as Israel and Lebanon. The scale of the damage was evident as I drove towards Antakya a day after the earthquake. The industrial port of Iskenderun, 40km north of Antakya, was ablaze. Shipping containers had caught fire and thick billows of smoke turned the cloudless sky dark grey. In Belen, 45km outside Antakya, the air was filled with a stench – a mixture of dust, smoke and dead bodies. The road was hard to navigate for all of the rubble strewn across it. Civilians directed traffic to let ambulances through; the siren wails were unending. There was little sign of the government. Most people digging through the rubble were locals, volunteer-led search-and-rescue organisations and municipal teams from across Turkey. AFAD, the government’s disaster-response arm, has been condemned for its ineffective response to recent disasters, such as the forest fires that swept through the south of Turkey in 2021. In the six hours I spent in Antakya, I saw just one AFAD team helping gendarmes, as local law enforcement is known. “They’re not here,” said Mehmet, a volunteer helping to organise the gendarmes who didn’t want to give his surname as he was criticising the government. “And even if they do come, they don’t know what they’re doing.” The air at the centre of the city was so thick with dust and smoke that it coated my hands and the inside of my nose, and filled my throat. Mannequins still dressed in wedding gowns leaned, head-first, out of broken windows. The hospital was damaged beyond repair. The police station is a pile of sand-coloured rubble with a sign on top. There is nowhere for people to seek shelter as the places in which they might have sought refuge have also crumbled. AFAD hadn’t begun to erect tents or portable toilets. Many people are without food, water and basic sanitation. One aid worker asked me, in a whisper, if I could spare a sanitary pad for a woman he was helping. Antakya looks like “hell on Earth”, according to Sahin Kale, a relief worker. Individuals have set up food-distribution centres themselves. Lines of cars snake into the city, as people try to find their families. There has been hardly any mobile reception since the earthquake, and relatives have to come in person to find out whether their families are alive, injured or dead. In the centre of the city, near the clock tower, eight bodies lay on the ground covered in blankets. Passers-by lifted the corners of the multi-coloured sheets to see if, perhaps, a loved one lay underneath. Bulent, an aid worker, said many of the dead were refugees who had crossed the border from Syria during the civil war there. Mahmut Togrul, the representative for nearby Gaziantep for the People’s Democratic Party, an opposition party, accused the government of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of failing to plan for the disaster. He spent Monday and Tuesday travelling between villages on the outskirts of Gaziantep, which was also hard hit, and says many rural areas have seen no search-and-rescue efforts at all. A doctor who asked to remain anonymous for fear of reprisal from the government said that when he visited Kahramanmaras, near the epicentre of the quake, on Tuesday, there was no electricity, water or food for injured and dying patients. He saw 1,500 people waiting to be treated. “This kind of earthquake was expected here for a long time,” Togrul said over the phone. “But, unfortunately, the authorities did not plan for this situation in advance. That’s why there are delays, why the organisation is bad…People are having to fight cold, snow and hunger while also trying to dig out their dead and wounded relatives.” Erdogan has said he has spoken to global leaders and declared a state of emergency in the affected regions, which will last three months. He has urged Turks to donate to AFAD, though they have been paying earthquake insurance since 1999. He plans to visit the disaster zone today. Without an effective government response, Turkish people have been left to improvise their own solutions. They have turned to an app, Deprem.io, built within a day of the disaster, and a Google Doc compiling the last-known locations of missing people. As the sun began to set in Antakya at around 5.30pm on Tuesday, the Mansuroglu family was still waiting to find out whether Sedat was still alive. Hamide was held on either side by her children, Ayhan and Sibel. A digger, which had finally arrived, chipped away at the rubble but, in doing so, hid Sedat in debris. There has been limited heavy equipment in the city, and this one had come from Ankara, a drive of nearly 700km to the north. Hamide winced and screamed with every scoop of the digger. “You’re going to destroy it! He is going to die,” she screamed, sure her son was alive inside. Her wrinkled hands clawed at the headscarf on her head, her features contorted in pain. Sibel and Ayhan watched, blank-faced with shock, as the machine tried to reach their youngest brother. Suddenly, a volunteer at the site looked back at the gathered crowd. Something in the air shifted. A foot had emerged again from the rubble. The search-and-rescue volunteer looked back at the crowd, then down. Hamide wailed and fell to the ground. It was clear Sedat was dead. Her screams mingled with the sirens that wailed past. “Let me see him,” she said, “I have to see him!” • What made the earthquake in Turkey and Syria so deadly?• The scale of the disaster in Turkey and Syria keeps growing Ayhan ran to his brother’s body, to confirm the death with his own eyes. Sedat’s body was lifeless, crushed by the three floors that had collapsed on top of him. Ayhan held his mother back. “Why do you have to see him?” he asked. “If only I had died instead,” she screamed, falling to the ground. As she cried and writhed in the arms of her surviving children, the rescue team covered Sedat with a brown velveteen blanket pulled from the rubble and carried his body towards his mother. Hamide collapsed on top of him. “My son, I should have died in your place,” she cried. Behind the family, a 35-year-old named Nuri Delioglan began to weep. He covered his eyes, which were bloodshot and puffy. I turned and asked him what was wrong. “My brother lived in the apartment below him,” he said. “We have no idea where he is. He might be in there.” ■ Erin O’Brien is a freelance journalist living in Istanbul IMAGES: Burak Kara/Getty Images, Rami al SAYED / AFP, OMAR HAJ KADOUR/AFP, ADEM ALTAN/AFP, Ercin Erturk/Anadolu Agency, Francisco Seco/AP