RUGBY UNION’S Six Nations tournament can sometimes be a parochial affair, but not in a World Cup year. The European contest, which starts on February 4th, should show which northern-hemisphere nation will offer the greatest challenge to the southern-hemisphere giants—New Zealand, South Africa and Australia—in the autumn. The two obvious northern candidates, France and Ireland, are ranked first and second in the world. In friendly matches last autumn, which pitted many of the world’s top teams against each other, both beat South Africa, the reigning world champions, and Australia. Earlier in the year, Ireland (whose team includes players from both the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland), also pulled off the remarkable feat of beating the All Blacks 2-1 in a series played on New Zealand soil. England, by contrast, lost to both South Africa and Argentina, though they did manage a last-minute draw against New Zealand. Wales fared worse, losing to the minnows of Georgia. The latter contest recalled the 1991 World Cup, when Wales were defeated by what was then known as Western Samoa, sparking the Welsh joke: “Thank goodness we weren’t playing the whole of Samoa.” The defeat prompted Wales to sack their coach, Wayne Pivac, and to bring back another New Zealander, Warren Gatland, who had led the team to much success during his previous stint from 2007 to 2019. England too parted company with their coach, Eddie Jones, an abrasive Australian who had shepherded the team to the World Cup final in 2019. Australia, having suffered a disappointing stream of defeats, confirmed international rugby’s tendency to stick with familiar faces and hired Mr Jones for a second stint. The new England boss is Steve Borthwick, a former captain of the national team. England and Wales could turn their fortunes around, but they have weaknesses. England’s scrum, historically a strength, was exposed by South Africa in the autumn internationals, and the team has struggled with indiscipline. Owen Farrell, the captain, is one of the worst offenders, and has only just finished a suspension for a dangerous tackle; he was suspended for a similar offence in 2020. Wales suffered a precipitous decline in form in 2022. Having won the Six Nations in 2021, scoring 20 tries in the process, they dropped to fifth place last year and scored only eight. On their day Scotland can beat any northern-hemisphere side. But the team has found it hard to string results together. The Scots have never won the Six Nations, or even come second; their last tournament victory was in the Five Nations of 1999, before Italy joined the competition. And it was only last year that Italy ended a 36-game losing streak in the Six Nations, though they have shown recent signs of improvement, including an autumn victory against Australia. This leaves Ireland and France as the two outstanding northern teams. Club-rugby results hint at their likely dominance in this year’s Six Nations. Last season’s European Champions Cup final saw La Rochelle of France edge past Leinster of Ireland; in 2021 La Rochelle lost to their French rivals, Toulouse. All three teams have made it into the knockout stages this year as well, and are considered by bookmakers to be the likeliest winners. France looked especially formidable last year, but have lost a few players to injury. They still have a powerful pack, as well as a scrum-half, Antoine Dupont, who was voted World Rugby player of the year in 2021. Ireland’s success is likewise based on their pack and the tactical nous of their fly-half, Johnny Sexton. And in Josh van der Flier, a flanker, they possess the World Rugby player of the year of 2022. They will play les bleus in Dublin in this year’s Six Nations and may indeed end up topping the table. But the French will have home advantage in the World Cup. That makes them favourites to be only the second northern-hemisphere side to lift the trophy, after England in 2003.■