The Nigerian presidential election is more unpredictable than it has been in decades. The surprise popularity of Peter Obi, an outside candidate, has given some young Nigerians hope that they will be able to build a fulfilling life for themselves in their native land. Others think it makes little difference whether this week’s election is won by Obi, who is considered a whippersnapper at 61, or by one of his older opponents from the two main parties. There are a lot of young Nigerians (more than 60% of the population is under the age of 25), but they don’t have much to look forward to. Nigerians are poorer than they were when Muhammadu Buhari, the 80-year-old president, took the reins eight years ago. Universities are closed for months at a time owing to strikes; hospitals have at times stopped treating people for the same reason. Official estimates put unemployment at 33%, and youth unemployment at 42.5%. Even those with a stable job have cause to worry: double-digit inflation is gnawing away at their salaries. Among the disaffected is 26-year-old Kemi (opening image), who until last year worked as an assistant at a law firm in Lagos. She was earning 50,000 naira ($11o) a month, barely enough to pay for rent and food (she was lucky to live rent-free). One of her sisters, an aspiring school teacher, was recently offered a salary of just 7,000 naira a month. Another teaches at a primary school and hasn’t been paid in months. So Kemi did what tens of thousands of young Nigerians did last year: she got out. According to a survey by Gallup, 53% of Nigerian adults would like to do the same. The country has been losing its talent to the rest of the world for decades. But recently it has felt more like a one-way street. In the years after Nigeria gained independence from Britain in 1960, most of those who went abroad to study planned on returning, and some did. The country still felt like a hopeful place. But a series of military dictatorships ruled the country for most of the time between 1966 and 1999, and more people left for good as hope waned. Democratic rule does not seem to have inspired renewed optimism; many who make up today’s exodus are resigned to not going back. Leaving Nigeria is so common that it has earned the nickname, japa, a colloquialism in the Yoruba language which, loosely translated, means to scarper. Kemi, her husband and her circle of friends all managed to japa to Britain in the past year, using a portfolio of tricks. Boluwatife (pictured above) was earning 90,000 naira a month as a shop assistant in Nigeria, just about enough to live on, but couldn’t find a job with decent career prospects that paid even half that. Now she’s doing a masters in Lincoln. A year ago, Joy didn’t have a passport. Now she and her friend Toluwanimi are studying law at university in Norwich. Together, this group of twenty-somethings offer a guide to getting out of Nigeria. “Leave while you still have energy,” says Kemi. Her mother, a shop owner, has decided not to follow her because the idea of starting a new life at 58 is so daunting. Some of Kemi’s older friends find it hard to contemplate emigrating with children. Those who do make it out struggle to adapt. Professionals cannot just pick up in their new country where they left off. Lawyers who qualified in Nigeria have to take new bar exams; doctors may have to pass another set of tests before they can practise. In the meantime they have little choice but to work where there is demand for low-wage immigrant labour, such as providing care for the elderly. Leaving before you’ve finished your studies is a particularly good idea – a university education is one of the few reasons a Nigerian might be granted a visa to the West. Higher-education institutions are even going out of their way to entice them. In Germany there are scholarship programmes specifically for Nigerian students. Some universities in America waive tuition entirely. In Britain the number of student visas granted to Nigerians jumped almost eightfold between 2019 and 2022 to 66,000. If you want to japa, be prepared for scams. Exploitative middlemen abound, advertising their services as one-stop shops for help with university admissions and visa applications. “Education consultants” offer to write applications, fill out your visa forms, even win you a scholarship. You’ll need about $100 just to arrange a call with one of these agents. The full package will set you back $4,000, perhaps more if you are aiming for America. Kemi’s friend Joy (pictured above right, with Toluwanimi) paid $330 for someone to do her university application for her (“I didn’t have time to write a statement of purpose. I had to go to work!” she says). It turned out fine for her, but others using these services aren’t so lucky. Guarantees offered by consultants can turn out to be worthless in practice. One woman Kemi knows paid an agent to help her with the paperwork to go to Canada. When she got off the plane she told immigration officials that she was a teacher, only to find that the agent had logged her as a customer-service representative. She was deported back to Nigeria; the agent stopped answering her calls. Kemi and her friends laugh now as they recount the many ways they squirrelled away money to get out of Nigeria. But it wasn’t easy. They all come from working-class or lower-middle-class backgrounds, and had virtually no savings. Their families and friends took out loans on their behalf, sold cars and plots of land, and begged friends to chip in. Kemi dipped into her wedding fund. “I was just thinking, ‘Where we go see money now?’,” Joy says, breaking into pidgin English. “We go steal?” She didn’t have to, but some of her acquaintances took out loans against their parents’ houses without telling them. (She says they worked to pay the money back before the parents noticed anything was amiss.) Others are hastily marrying friends who have earned places at foreign universities, hoping to tag along as their spouses. Every month, Joy and Toluwanimi would go on week-long religious fasts, praying that God would provide. They lived frugally in hostel-like accommodation; Boluwatife skipped meals to make her savings stretch further. “Anyone who wants to japa should know, it’s not for the faint-hearted,” she says. “But it was worth it. It is worth dying for.” Nigerians typically don’t divulge their travel plans. Some say it is a legacy of brutal military dictatorships, when an unfriendly neighbour learning of your next move could cost you your worldly goods or your life. Some hold superstitions about imaginary enemies who might derail their plans. Others don’t want to jinx the move, or wish to avoid embarrassment if things go awry. One of Kemi’s friends was offered a scholarship to study in America, but after he was denied a student visa for the fourth time the university rescinded its offer; he is still in Nigeria. So when Boluwatife won a place to do a masters degree at the University of Lincoln, complete with a scholarship, she kept quiet. She told only Kemi and one of her cousins, Felix. She did not even tell her aunt in Britain, though she was planning on living with her while at university, and the two had never met. Felix called to warn the aunt just three days before Boluwatife showed up on her doorstep last October. Fortunately the aunt was understanding: she too had relied on the kindness of strangers when she left for Britain more than 20 years ago. Boluwatife didn’t realise until she arrived in Britain that her campus is about four hours away from her aunt’s house. Now she goes to university on Sundays and returns to her aunt’s on Wednesday evenings. In Lincoln she shares a single bed with a friend. You’ve made it out. You’ve shared an Instagram video of yourself “growing and glowing”. You’re telling everyone back home how well you’re getting on – conveniently leaving out that you’re really struggling with the cold, you have run out of your prized yaji pepper and are actually feeling a bit lonely and homesick. Now comes the hard part: making ends meet. Kemi and her friends, including Boluwatife, all found jobs. They work for £11 ($13.25) an hour through an agency as care workers for the elderly, children with disabilities and others in need of help – bathing them, dispensing their medicines and keeping them company. In Britain, foreign students can work only 20 hours a week in term time. (Some countries, like Canada, are more relaxed about work hours; other countries, like China, are more strict.) The night shifts can be brutal, and they are exposed to a greater number of naked buttocks than they would like. But they are already earning more each week than they did in Nigeria in a month. They plan to pay the rest of their tuition in instalments, and pay back all the loans that got them to Britain. The group are hoping to stay out of Nigeria as long as possible. Boluwatife says she will pursue a PhD if she has to. Kemi, who did get married in the end, albeit in an unusually modest ceremony, can stay longer in Britain if her husband does a masters degree. Her ultimate dream is to go to Canada, which is considered more welcoming to Nigerian workers. Toluwanimi has already looked into working as a paralegal there. The idea of returning home plays no role in her plans. “I’ve left Nigeria in my back-view mirror.” ■ Ore Ogunbiyi is a reporter and podcaster for The Economist PHOTOGRAPHS: ADAMA JALLOH