Environmental problems in big, fast-growing developing countries can seem intractable. China’s recent advances against air pollution therefore offer, as well as relief to millions, an inspiring lesson. Before hosting the Olympics in 2008, Beijing was so blanketed in poisonous smog it had to close factories and empty its roads to protect athletes’ health. Yet by applying more modest controls over a much greater area, spanning Beijing, Tianjin and 26 adjacent prefectures, it has since made much more sustainable progress. The average concentration of hazardous pm2.5 particles in Beijing in 2021 was half what it was in 2015. Contestants at the Winter Olympics in Beijing last year performed under blue skies and with a view of distant peaks. This should provide not only inspiration but an invaluable model for the current possessors of the world’s filthiest air, the countries of South Asia. The region has nine of the world’s ten most polluted cities, with devastating consequences for their citizens. In Bangladesh, India, Nepal and Pakistan air pollution kills over 2m people a year. Output lost to pollution-related illness or deaths is estimated to have cost India alone $37bn, or 1.4% of gdp, in 2019. And despite growing public anger over this catastrophe, none of the countries has introduced effective pollution controls. New analysis by the World Bank suggests that is mainly because they are trying to do so, as Beijing formerly did, on too small a scale. Most of the toxic brown haze choking South Asia’s cities comes not from local cars and waste dumps but from brick kilns, stubble-burning and other pollution sources far away. The best way to reduce it, as China has shown, is to model pollution, share data and plan controls over the vast expanse in which the smog circulates. That way the most cost-effective solutions, such as regulating brick-kilns, can be prioritised over more expensive or growth-dampening ones, like closing power stations. The Bank has mapped six of these so-called airsheds in South Asia. Huge areas, they span states and municipalities; four of the six cross national borders. One stretches from eastern Iran via western Afghanistan into Pakistan; another from northern India to Bangladesh. It is not easy to imagine India and Pakistan, let alone the mullah-rulers of Afghanistan and Iran, exchanging data and best-practice on airborne particulates. Riven by its violent history, South Asia is one of the world’s least integrated and most divided regions. Its officials refer to the smog clouds puthering to and fro across their disputed borders as “environmental terrorism”. This must change. South Asian governments will not otherwise be able to tackle the enormous economic and environmental problems they increasingly face. To meet the aspirations of their 2bn people, all the countries need sustained and rapid economic growth, which their estrangement impedes. Trade within the region is minuscule and one of its biggest missed opportunities. And air pollution is only one of the cross-border environmental blights it faces. Global warming is redesigning the waterways that cross South Asian frontiers, making severe droughts and flooding likelier on either side. It will increasingly also send refugees across them. To grow faster and prepare for such crises, South Asian countries must learn to co-operate. In their common need to abate the smog killing their citizens, they have both a compelling incentive and a political opportunity to begin that process. ■