KATERYNYNSKA SQUARE is nestled among Odessa’s great architectural treasures. Flanked on all sides by attractive pastel-coloured 19th-century buildings, the park sits close to the Potemkin Steps, which connect the port to the city, and the baroque opera house. The plinth in the centre now stands empty, apart from a Ukrainian flag. Until recently, it held a statue of Catherine the Great, the empress of Russia who founded Odessa in 1794. Since Vladimir Putin’s invasion, Ukrainians have toppled several sculptures as part of the country’s “de-Russification” efforts. Dozens of effigies of Alexander Pushkin, a Russian poet, have been removed from squares and street corners. Yet the withdrawal of this particular bronze has been significant, as it prompted a spat at UNESCO’s headquarters in Paris last month. “It was a battle as fierce as Bakhmut,” says Gennadiy Trukhanov, Odessa’s mayor, who was in attendance, “only without the use of firepower.” A committee was discussing whether to add Odessa to UNESCO’s list of World Heritage sites, a designation given to places of “outstanding universal value to humanity”. Ukraine is not among the 21 members of the world-heritage committee, and so its interests were represented by Belgium, Bulgaria, Greece, Italy and Japan. Russia was in fierce opposition. Tatiana Dovgalenko, Russia’s delegate, tried to hold up proceedings. She said that the original petition concerned a city whose name had one more letter (in a departure from Russian styling, Ukraine changed the official spelling of the city’s name from Odessa to Odesa). She proposed an “amendment”—one which involved deleting most of the draft decision. Puzzlingly, at one point, she burst into song. Yet her main argument was that a place that takes down monuments should not be granted protected status. Public art has long been at the centre of political debates in Odessa. The destruction of statues of Lenin and other communist figures began after the fall of the Soviet Union and resumed during the Maidan uprising in 2014. The plinth in Katerynynska Square is a particularly interesting example, as it reflects the vicissitudes of the port city itself. The original tribute to the empress, created by Yuri Dmitrenko and unveiled in 1900, was shrouded by Bolsheviks during the Russian revolution. Ivan Bunin, a writer, observed that the “monument was wrapped and bandaged from head to toe with dirty wet rags; and it was also entwined with branches and pasted over with red wooden stars.” In 1921 officials removed Catherine from her perch and erected a bust, then a full statue, of Karl Marx. The model was hollow, however, and strong winds blew all but the philosopher’s feet away. In the 1930s the plinth was decorated with an enormous red hammer and sickle, a symbol of worker solidarity; it disappeared during the second world war and the Romanian occupation of Odessa. By 1965 a hulking Soviet-realist tribute to the crew of the Potemkin battleship was erected, drawing on a fictitious scene from a famous propaganda film by Sergei Eisenstein. In 2007 a local businessman provided the funds for artists to restore the statue of Catherine the Great from 1900. She was returned to her pedestal to the sound of pipes and drums, as well as protests: members of the Cossack revival movement resented seeing the empress return as she had crushed the Zaporozhian Cossacks. At the unveiling, Alexander Babich, a historian of Odessa, reflected on the tumultuous history of public art in the park. “On this plinth”, he remarked, “statues do not stay more than a dozen years, on average.” That proved prescient. Last autumn, at the initiative of the municipal council, Catherine’s fate was put to an online vote and the “out” contingent prevailed. In November the statue was boxed in plywood; a few weeks later it was dismantled and it is now being stored by the city’s fine-arts museum. Despite Ms Dovgalenko’s arguments, this did not prevent UNESCO from declaring Odessa a World Heritage site. For some, that title is overdue, given the city’s historic importance and beauty. For others, it is an important gesture. Though countries who have signed the World Heritage Convention agree to protect and preserve any sites within their borders, Odesites know there is only so much they can do to shield their home city from Russian missiles. UNESCO estimates that more than 230 cultural sites in Ukraine have been damaged during the war. Now, at least, if Odessa’s buildings are destroyed, one resident says there “will be an extra argument to make against our enemies when they testify in the International Criminal Court in The Hague.” ■