DONKEYS TEND not to play prominent roles during Oscar season. This year, however, is proving an exception: a diminutive donkey named Jenny steals several scenes in Martin McDonagh’s “The Banshees of Inisherin”, which was nominated for Best Picture. The main character in “EO”, the latest film by Jerzy Skolimowski, a veteran Polish writer-director, is a donkey. This unusual casting has gone down well with critics: “EO” secured a nomination for Best International Feature Film and won a Jury Prize at the Cannes Film Festival last year. “EO” tells the story of its titular long-eared protagonist. (The creature’s name is a phonetic spelling of its braying, much like Eeyore’s in “Winnie-the-Pooh”.) Family-friendly animal movie it is not. Instead, “EO” is closer to Robert Bresson’s arthouse classic “Au hasard Balthazar” (1966), a tragic tale about an ass who is beaten and exploited (pictured, below). In Mr Skolimowski’s work, the donkey travels from a circus in Poland to Italy, plodding through woods, motorway service stations and urban wastelands. And like Balthazar, EO is betrayed, neglected and mistreated by humans along the way. Mr Skolimowski was inspired by Bresson’s film, but “EO” is its own beast. It reveals the world through the donkey’s “huge melancholic eyes”, as the auteur describes them. At times, the camera is positioned at the creature’s height so viewers share EO’s unusual perspective. Victor Kossakovsky also adopted this approach in “Gunda”, an intriguing animal documentary about a pig. In standard Hollywood fare, creatures tend to be anthropomorphised. Movies such as “Bambi” (1942) and “Babe” (1995) prompted some viewers to re-evaluate their relationship with the natural world; many became vegetarians. That impact was achieved by likening the animals’ worlds to the human one. By contrast, EO is never anything other than an enigmatic donkey. Mr Skolimowski finds a kinship across the species gap while maintaining a sense of EO’s otherness. What prompted the octogenarian film-maker to work with the proverbially obstinate and foolish donkey? According to Mr Skolimowski, “they are stubborn, but they’re not stupid.” Rather, he says, they are “extremely intelligent animals and very sensitive”. He was motivated, in part, by animal-welfare concerns. Industrial farming is a form of “torture” which should be banned, he argues. His respect for animals deepened during filming, when he bonded with the Sardinian donkeys who played his protagonist, talking to them and feeding them carrots. Half of the crew became vegetarian; following the shoot, Mr Skolimowski and his wife Ewa Piaskowska—his co-producer and co-writer—cut their meat consumption (pictured, below). Over the course of his seven-decade-long career, Mr Skolimowski has probed the relation between those who wield power and those who have none. Baleful and unloved, EO is another of the film-maker’s marginalised, disenfranchised protagonists. “Deep End” (1970) delves into the mind of a lovesick school leaver who takes a job at a public swimming pool. In “Moonlighting” (1982), Jeremy Irons plays a Polish labourer who toils illegally in hostile London; “Essential Killing” (2010) follows a suspected terrorist (Vincent Gallo) who escapes. His fascination with outsiders was shaped by his own experiences. Mr Skolimowski started his career in Poland as an actor, film-maker and writer, working alongside the brightest talents of the Polish New Wave such as Andrzej Wajda and Roman Polanski. Mr Polanski went on to make the Hollywood classics “Rosemary’s Baby” (1968) and “Chinatown” (1974). By contrast, Mr Skolimowski’s rise stalled when in 1967 he made “Hands Up!”, a critique of Poland’s Stalinist past. It was banned by the authorities and the cineaste moved to Britain to continue his career. “I was forced to leave the country”, he laments. Still, he created some unique movies during the period, casting a foreigner’s gaze on British life. His oddball horror flick “The Shout” (1978) is considered a cult classic, for instance. “I made some lousy films as well,” Mr Skolimowski concedes. With “EO”, however, he has made one of his most accomplished works: a masterpiece which encourages empathy for all living beings (pictured, above). “I miss being on the set with donkeys,” he says. “I was not expecting to really fall in love with the animal.” An American critic even suggested the donkeys deserved Oscar nominations. At last, some recognition for the beast of burden. ■ “EO” is playing in British cinemas now. A retrospective of Jerzy Skolimowski’s work will run at BFI Southbank in London from March 27th to April 29th.